---
slug: an10.116
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Ajita
---

<!-- @segment an10.116:1.1 -->

Then the wanderer Ajita went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment an10.116:1.2 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment an10.116:2.1 -->

“Worthy Gotama, we have a spiritual companion called ‘Astute’.

<!-- @segment an10.116:2.2 -->

He has worked out around five hundred arguments by which followers of other religions will know when they’ve been refuted.”

<!-- @segment an10.116:3.1 -->

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants,

<!-- @segment an10.116:3.2 -->

“Mendicants, do you remember this Astute’s points?”

<!-- @segment an10.116:3.3 -->

“Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One!

<!-- @segment an10.116:3.4 -->

Let the Buddha speak and the mendicants will remember it.”

<!-- @segment an10.116:4.1 -->

“Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment an10.116:4.2 -->

“Yes, sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment an10.116:4.3 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment an10.116:5.1 -->

“Mendicants, take a certain someone who rebuts and quashes unprincipled statements with unprincipled statements. This delights an unprincipled assembly,

<!-- @segment an10.116:5.2 -->

who make a colossal racket:

<!-- @segment an10.116:5.3 -->

‘He is truly astute! He is truly astute!’

<!-- @segment an10.116:6.1 -->

Someone else rebuts and quashes principled statements with unprincipled statements. This delights an unprincipled assembly,

<!-- @segment an10.116:6.2 -->

who make a colossal racket:

<!-- @segment an10.116:6.3 -->

‘He is truly astute! He is truly astute!’

<!-- @segment an10.116:7.1 -->

Someone else rebuts and quashes principled and unprincipled statements with unprincipled statements. This delights an unprincipled assembly,

<!-- @segment an10.116:7.2 -->

who make a colossal racket:

<!-- @segment an10.116:7.3 -->

‘He is truly astute! He is truly astute!’

<!-- @segment an10.116:8.1 -->

Mendicants, you should know bad principles and good principles.

<!-- @segment an10.116:8.2 -->

And you should know bad results and good results.

<!-- @segment an10.116:8.3 -->

Knowing these things, your practice should follow the good principles with good results.

<!-- @segment an10.116:9.1 -->

So what are bad principles? What are good principles? What are bad results? And what are good results?

<!-- @segment an10.116:9.2 -->

Wrong view is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.116:9.3 -->

Right view is a good principle.

<!-- @segment an10.116:9.4 -->

And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong view are bad results.

<!-- @segment an10.116:9.5 -->

And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right view are good results.

<!-- @segment an10.116:10.1 -->

Wrong purpose is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.116:10.2 -->

Right purpose is a good principle. …

<!-- @segment an10.116:10.3 -->

Wrong speech is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.116:10.4 -->

Right speech is a good principle. …

<!-- @segment an10.116:10.5 -->

Wrong action is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.116:10.6 -->

Right action is a good principle. …

<!-- @segment an10.116:10.7 -->

Wrong livelihood is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.116:10.8 -->

Right livelihood is a good principle. …

<!-- @segment an10.116:10.9 -->

Wrong effort is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.116:10.10 -->

Right effort is a good principle. …

<!-- @segment an10.116:10.11 -->

Wrong mindfulness is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.116:10.12 -->

Right mindfulness is a good principle. …

<!-- @segment an10.116:10.13 -->

Wrong immersion is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.116:10.14 -->

Right immersion is a good principle. …

<!-- @segment an10.116:10.15 -->

Wrong knowledge is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.116:10.16 -->

Right knowledge is a good principle. …

<!-- @segment an10.116:11.1 -->

Wrong freedom is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.116:11.2 -->

Right freedom is a good principle.

<!-- @segment an10.116:11.3 -->

And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong freedom are bad results.

<!-- @segment an10.116:11.4 -->

And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right freedom are good results.

<!-- @segment an10.116:12.1 -->

‘You should know bad principles and good principles.

<!-- @segment an10.116:12.2 -->

And you should know bad results and good results.

<!-- @segment an10.116:12.3 -->

Knowing these things, your practice should follow the good principles with good results.’

<!-- @segment an10.116:12.4 -->

That’s what I said, and this is why I said it.”
