---
slug: an10.72
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Thorns
---

<!-- @segment an10.72:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof, together with several well-known senior disciples.

<!-- @segment an10.72:1.2 -->

They included Venerables Cāla, Upacāla, Kakkaṭa, Kaṭimbha, Kaṭa, Kaṭissaṅga,

<!-- @segment an10.72:1.3 -->

and other well-known senior disciples.

<!-- @segment an10.72:2.1 -->

Now at that time several well-known Licchavis plunged deep into the Great Wood to see the Buddha. Driving a succession of fine carriages, they made a colossal racket.

<!-- @segment an10.72:2.2 -->

Then those venerables thought:

<!-- @segment an10.72:2.3 -->

“These several well-known Licchavis have plunged deep into the Great Wood to see the Buddha. Driving a succession of fine carriages, they’re making a colossal racket.

<!-- @segment an10.72:2.4 -->

But the Buddha has said that sound is a thorn to absorption.

<!-- @segment an10.72:2.5 -->

Let’s go to the Gosiṅga Sal Wood.

<!-- @segment an10.72:2.6 -->

There we can meditate comfortably, free of noise and crowds.”

<!-- @segment an10.72:2.7 -->

Then those venerables went to the Gosiṅga Sal Wood,

<!-- @segment an10.72:2.8 -->

where they meditated comfortably, free of noise and crowds.

<!-- @segment an10.72:3.1 -->

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants:

<!-- @segment an10.72:3.2 -->

“Mendicants, where are Cāla, Upacāla, Kakkaṭa, Kaṭimbha, Kaṭa, and Kaṭissaṅga?

<!-- @segment an10.72:3.3 -->

Where have these senior disciples gone?”

<!-- @segment an10.72:4.1 -->

And the mendicants told him what had happened.

<!-- @segment an10.72:4.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.72:4.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.72:4.4 -->



<!-- @segment an10.72:5.1 -->

“Good, good, mendicants! It’s just as those great disciples have so rightly explained. I have said that sound is a thorn to absorption.

<!-- @segment an10.72:6.1 -->

Mendicants, there are these ten thorns.

<!-- @segment an10.72:6.2 -->

What ten?

<!-- @segment an10.72:6.3 -->

Relishing company is a thorn for someone who loves seclusion. Focusing on the beautiful feature of things is a thorn for someone pursuing the meditation on ugliness. Seeing shows is a thorn to someone restraining the senses. Lingering in the neighborhood of ladies is a thorn to chastity. Sound is a thorn to the first absorption. Placing the mind and keeping it connected are a thorn to the second absorption. Rapture is a thorn to the third absorption. Breathing is a thorn to the fourth absorption. Perception and feeling are a thorn to the attainment of the cessation of perception and feeling. Greed, hate, and delusion are thorns.

<!-- @segment an10.72:7.1 -->

Mendicants, live free of thorns!

<!-- @segment an10.72:7.2 -->

Live rid of thorns!

<!-- @segment an10.72:7.3 -->

Mendicants, live free of thorns and rid of thorns!

<!-- @segment an10.72:7.4 -->

The perfected ones live free of thorns,

<!-- @segment an10.72:7.5 -->

rid of thorns,

<!-- @segment an10.72:7.6 -->

free and rid of thorns.”
