---
slug: an10.20
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Abodes of the Noble Ones (2nd)
description: The Buddha describes the ten abodes of the noble ones in which the noble ones of the past, present, and future abide—and how has a mendicant given up five factors?, it’s when a mendicant has given up sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt, that’s how a mendicant has given up five factors, and and how does a mendicant possess six factors?, and it’s when a mendicant, seeing a sight with their eyes, is neither happy nor sad. they remain equanimous, mindful and aware, and hearing a sound with their ears, and smelling an odor with their nose, and tasting a flavor with their tongue, and encountering a touch with their body, and knowing an idea with their mind, they’re neither happy nor sad. they remain equanimous, mindful and aware.
qualities: truth, wisdom, mindfulness, delusion, greed, aversion
theme: principle
---

<!-- @segment an10.20:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Kurus, near the Kuru town named Kammāsadamma.

<!-- @segment an10.20:1.2 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment an10.20:2.1 -->

“There are these ten abodes of the noble ones in which the noble ones of the past, present, and future abide.

<!-- @segment an10.20:2.2 -->

What ten?

<!-- @segment an10.20:2.3 -->

A mendicant has given up five factors, possesses six factors, has a single guard, has four supports, has cast aside idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth, has totally given up searching, has unsullied intentions, has stilled the physical process, and is well freed in mind and well freed by wisdom.

<!-- @segment an10.20:3.1 -->

And how has a mendicant given up five factors?

<!-- @segment an10.20:3.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant has given up sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt.

<!-- @segment an10.20:3.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant has given up five factors.

<!-- @segment an10.20:4.1 -->

And how does a mendicant possess six factors?

<!-- @segment an10.20:4.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant, seeing a sight with their eyes, is neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous, mindful and aware.

<!-- @segment an10.20:4.3 -->

Hearing a sound with their ears …

<!-- @segment an10.20:4.4 -->

Smelling an odor with their nose …

<!-- @segment an10.20:4.5 -->

Tasting a flavor with their tongue …

<!-- @segment an10.20:4.6 -->

Encountering a touch with their body …

<!-- @segment an10.20:4.7 -->

Knowing an idea with their mind, they’re neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous, mindful and aware.

<!-- @segment an10.20:4.8 -->

That’s how a mendicant possesses six factors.

<!-- @segment an10.20:5.1 -->

And how does a mendicant have a single guard?

<!-- @segment an10.20:5.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant’s heart is guarded by mindfulness.

<!-- @segment an10.20:5.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant has a single guard.

<!-- @segment an10.20:6.1 -->

And how does a mendicant have four supports?

<!-- @segment an10.20:6.2 -->

After appraisal, a mendicant uses some things, endures some things, avoids some things, and gets rid of some things.

<!-- @segment an10.20:6.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant has four supports.

<!-- @segment an10.20:7.1 -->

And how has a mendicant cast aside idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth?

<!-- @segment an10.20:7.2 -->

Different ascetics and brahmins have different idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth. For example:

<!-- @segment an10.20:7.3 -->

the cosmos is eternal, or not eternal, or finite, or infinite; the soul and the body are one and the same, or the soul is one thing, the body another; after death, a realized one still exists, or no longer exists, or both still exists and no longer exists, or neither still exists nor no longer exists.

<!-- @segment an10.20:7.4 -->

A mendicant has cast out, cast aside, thrown out, discarded, let go of, given up, and relinquished all these.

<!-- @segment an10.20:7.5 -->

That’s how a mendicant has cast aside idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth.

<!-- @segment an10.20:8.1 -->

And how has a mendicant totally given up searching?

<!-- @segment an10.20:8.2 -->

It’s when they’ve given up searching for sensual pleasures, for continued existence, and for a spiritual life.

<!-- @segment an10.20:8.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant has totally given up searching.

<!-- @segment an10.20:9.1 -->

And how does a mendicant have unsullied intentions?

<!-- @segment an10.20:9.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant has given up intentions of sensuality, malice, and cruelty.

<!-- @segment an10.20:9.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant has unsullied intentions.

<!-- @segment an10.20:10.1 -->

And how has a mendicant stilled the physical process?

<!-- @segment an10.20:10.2 -->

It’s when, with the giving up of pleasure and pain and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

<!-- @segment an10.20:10.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant has stilled the physical process.

<!-- @segment an10.20:11.1 -->

And how is a mendicant well freed in mind?

<!-- @segment an10.20:11.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant’s mind is freed from greed, hate, and delusion.

<!-- @segment an10.20:11.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant is well freed in mind.

<!-- @segment an10.20:12.1 -->

And how is a mendicant well freed by wisdom?

<!-- @segment an10.20:12.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant understands: ‘I’ve given up greed, hate, and delusion, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so they’re unable to arise in the future.’

<!-- @segment an10.20:12.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant’s mind is well freed by wisdom.

<!-- @segment an10.20:13.1 -->

Mendicants, whether in the past, future, or present, all noble ones abide in these same ten abodes of the noble ones.

<!-- @segment an10.20:13.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.20:13.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.20:13.4 -->

These are the ten abodes of the noble ones in which the noble ones of the past, present, and future abide.”

<!-- @segment an10.20:13.5 -->



<!-- @segment an10.20:13.6 -->



<!-- @segment an10.20:14.1 -->



<!-- @segment an10.20:14.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.20:14.3 -->
