---
slug: an10.11
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Lodgings
---

<!-- @segment an10.11:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, a mendicant with five factors, using and frequenting lodgings with five factors, will soon realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.

<!-- @segment an10.11:2.1 -->

And how does a mendicant have five factors?

<!-- @segment an10.11:2.2 -->

It’s when a noble disciple has faith in the Realized One’s awakening:

<!-- @segment an10.11:2.3 -->

‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’

<!-- @segment an10.11:2.4 -->

They are rarely ill or unwell. Their stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too cold, but just right, and fit for meditation.

<!-- @segment an10.11:2.5 -->

They’re not devious or deceitful. They reveal themselves honestly to the Teacher or sensible spiritual companions.

<!-- @segment an10.11:2.6 -->

They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They’re strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities.

<!-- @segment an10.11:2.7 -->

They’re wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering.

<!-- @segment an10.11:2.8 -->

That’s how a mendicant has five factors.

<!-- @segment an10.11:3.1 -->

And how does a lodging have five factors?

<!-- @segment an10.11:3.2 -->

It’s when a lodging is neither too far nor too near, but convenient for coming and going.

<!-- @segment an10.11:3.3 -->

It’s not bothered by people by day, and at night it’s quiet and still.

<!-- @segment an10.11:3.4 -->

There’s little disturbance from flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles.

<!-- @segment an10.11:3.5 -->

While staying in that lodging the necessities of life—robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick—are easy to come by.

<!-- @segment an10.11:3.6 -->

And in that lodging there are several senior mendicants who are very learned, inheritors of the heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the outlines.

<!-- @segment an10.11:3.7 -->

From time to time they go up to those mendicants and ask them questions:

<!-- @segment an10.11:3.8 -->

‘Why, sir, does it say this? What does that mean?’

<!-- @segment an10.11:3.9 -->

Those venerables reveal what is hidden, clarify what is unclear, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters.

<!-- @segment an10.11:3.10 -->

That’s how a lodging has five factors.

<!-- @segment an10.11:3.11 -->

A mendicant with five factors, using and frequenting lodgings with five factors, will soon realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.”
