---
slug: an10.60
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Girimānanda
---

<!-- @segment an10.60:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment an10.60:1.2 -->

Now at that time Venerable Girimānanda was sick, suffering, gravely ill.

<!-- @segment an10.60:1.3 -->

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

<!-- @segment an10.60:2.1 -->

“Sir, Venerable Girimānanda is sick, suffering, gravely ill.

<!-- @segment an10.60:2.2 -->

Sir, please go to Venerable Girimānanda out of sympathy.”

<!-- @segment an10.60:2.3 -->

“Ānanda, if you were to recite to the mendicant Girimānanda these ten perceptions, it’s possible that after hearing them his illness will die down on the spot.

<!-- @segment an10.60:3.1 -->

What ten?

<!-- @segment an10.60:3.2 -->

The perceptions of impermanence, not-self, ugliness, drawbacks, giving up, fading away, cessation, dissatisfaction with the whole world, impermanence of all conditions, and mindfulness of breathing.

<!-- @segment an10.60:4.1 -->

And what is the perception of impermanence?

<!-- @segment an10.60:4.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, and reflects like this:

<!-- @segment an10.60:4.3 -->

‘Form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness are impermanent.’

<!-- @segment an10.60:4.4 -->

And so they meditate observing impermanence in the five grasping aggregates.

<!-- @segment an10.60:4.5 -->

This is called the perception of impermanence.

<!-- @segment an10.60:5.1 -->

And what is the perception of not-self?

<!-- @segment an10.60:5.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, and reflects like this:

<!-- @segment an10.60:5.3 -->

‘The eye and sights, ear and sounds, nose and smells, tongue and tastes, body and touches, and mind and ideas are not-self.’

<!-- @segment an10.60:5.4 -->

And so they meditate observing not-self in the six interior and exterior sense fields.

<!-- @segment an10.60:5.5 -->

This is called the perception of not-self.

<!-- @segment an10.60:6.1 -->

And what is the perception of ugliness?

<!-- @segment an10.60:6.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant examines their own body up from the soles of the feet and down from the tips of the hairs, wrapped in skin and full of many kinds of filth.

<!-- @segment an10.60:6.3 -->

‘In this body there is head hair, body hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, undigested food, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva, snot, synovial fluid, urine.’

<!-- @segment an10.60:6.4 -->

And so they meditate observing ugliness in this body.

<!-- @segment an10.60:6.5 -->

This is called the perception of ugliness.

<!-- @segment an10.60:7.1 -->

And what is the perception of drawbacks?

<!-- @segment an10.60:7.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, and reflects like this:

<!-- @segment an10.60:7.3 -->

‘This body has much suffering and many drawbacks. For this body is beset with many kinds of affliction, such as the following.

<!-- @segment an10.60:7.4 -->

Diseases of the eye, inner ear, nose, tongue, body, head, outer ear, mouth, teeth, and lips. Cough, asthma, catarrh, inflammation, fever, stomach ache, fainting, dysentery, gastric pain, cholera, leprosy, boils, eczema, tuberculosis, epilepsy, herpes, itch, scabs, smallpox, scabies, hemorrhage, diabetes, piles, pimples, and ulcers. Afflictions stemming from disorders of bile, phlegm, wind, or their conjunction. Afflictions caused by change in weather, by not taking care of yourself, by overexertion, or as the result of past deeds. Cold, heat, hunger, thirst, defecation, and urination.’

<!-- @segment an10.60:7.5 -->

And so they meditate observing drawbacks in this body.

<!-- @segment an10.60:7.6 -->

This is called the perception of drawbacks.

<!-- @segment an10.60:8.1 -->

And what is the perception of giving up?

<!-- @segment an10.60:8.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant doesn’t tolerate a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought that has arisen, and they don’t tolerate any bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen, but give them up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them.

<!-- @segment an10.60:8.3 -->

This is called the perception of giving up.

<!-- @segment an10.60:9.1 -->

And what is the perception of fading away?

<!-- @segment an10.60:9.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, and reflects like this:

<!-- @segment an10.60:9.3 -->

‘This is peaceful; this is sublime—that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, extinguishment.’

<!-- @segment an10.60:9.4 -->

This is called the perception of fading away.

<!-- @segment an10.60:10.1 -->

And what is the perception of cessation?

<!-- @segment an10.60:10.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, and reflects like this:

<!-- @segment an10.60:10.3 -->

‘This is peaceful; this is sublime—that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the ending of craving, cessation, extinguishment.’

<!-- @segment an10.60:10.4 -->

This is called the perception of cessation.

<!-- @segment an10.60:11.1 -->

And what is the perception of dissatisfaction with the whole world?

<!-- @segment an10.60:11.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant lives giving up and not grasping on to the attraction and grasping to the world, the mental fixation, insistence, and underlying tendencies.

<!-- @segment an10.60:11.3 -->

This is called the perception of dissatisfaction with the whole world.

<!-- @segment an10.60:12.1 -->

And what is the perception of the impermanence of all conditions?

<!-- @segment an10.60:12.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant is horrified, repelled, and disgusted with all conditions.

<!-- @segment an10.60:12.3 -->

This is called the perception of the impermanence of all conditions.

<!-- @segment an10.60:13.1 -->

And what is mindfulness of breathing?

<!-- @segment an10.60:13.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight, and brings mindfulness to the present.

<!-- @segment an10.60:13.3 -->

Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out.

<!-- @segment an10.60:13.4 -->

Breathing in heavily they know: ‘I’m breathing in heavily.’ Breathing out heavily they know: ‘I’m breathing out heavily.’

<!-- @segment an10.60:13.5 -->

When breathing in lightly they know: ‘I’m breathing in lightly.’ Breathing out lightly they know: ‘I’m breathing out lightly.’

<!-- @segment an10.60:13.6 -->

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing the whole body.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing the whole body.’

<!-- @segment an10.60:13.7 -->

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in stilling the physical process.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out stilling the physical process.’

<!-- @segment an10.60:13.8 -->

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing rapture.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing rapture.’

<!-- @segment an10.60:13.9 -->

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing bliss.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing bliss.’

<!-- @segment an10.60:13.10 -->

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing the mental process.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing the mental process.’

<!-- @segment an10.60:13.11 -->

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in stilling the mental process.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out stilling the mental process.’

<!-- @segment an10.60:13.12 -->

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing the mind.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing the mind.’

<!-- @segment an10.60:13.13 -->

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in gladdening the mind.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out gladdening the mind.’

<!-- @segment an10.60:13.14 -->

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in immersing the mind in samādhi.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out immersing the mind in samādhi.’

<!-- @segment an10.60:13.15 -->

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in freeing the mind.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out freeing the mind.’

<!-- @segment an10.60:13.16 -->

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing impermanence.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing impermanence.’

<!-- @segment an10.60:13.17 -->

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing fading away.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing fading away.’

<!-- @segment an10.60:13.18 -->

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing cessation.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing cessation.’

<!-- @segment an10.60:13.19 -->

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing letting go.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing letting go.’

<!-- @segment an10.60:13.20 -->

This is called mindfulness of breathing.

<!-- @segment an10.60:14.1 -->

If you were to recite to the mendicant Girimānanda these ten perceptions, it’s possible that after hearing them his illness will die down on the spot.”

<!-- @segment an10.60:15.1 -->

Then Ānanda, having learned these ten perceptions from the Buddha himself, went to Girimānanda and recited them.

<!-- @segment an10.60:15.2 -->

Then after Girimānanda heard these ten perceptions his illness died down on the spot.

<!-- @segment an10.60:15.3 -->

And that’s how he recovered from that illness.

<!-- @segment an10.60:15.4 -->



<!-- @segment an10.60:15.5 -->



<!-- @segment an10.60:16.1 -->



<!-- @segment an10.60:16.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.60:16.3 -->
