---
slug: an10.33
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: A Judge
description: The Buddha teaches on a judge, presenting a tenfold teaching for disciples on the path.
qualities: learning, wholesome, mindfulness, ending, faith, tame
theme: training guideline, wisdom
---

<!-- @segment an10.33:1.1 -->

“Sir, how many qualities should a mendicant have to be deemed a judge?”

<!-- @segment an10.33:1.2 -->

“Upāli, a mendicant should have ten qualities to be deemed a judge.

<!-- @segment an10.33:1.3 -->

What ten?

<!-- @segment an10.33:1.4 -->

It’s when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken.

<!-- @segment an10.33:1.5 -->

They’re very learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and penetrating them theoretically.

<!-- @segment an10.33:1.6 -->

Both monastic codes have been passed down to them in detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well evaluated in both the rules and accompanying material.

<!-- @segment an10.33:1.7 -->

They’re firm and unfaltering in the training.

<!-- @segment an10.33:1.8 -->

When there are opposing parties, they’re able to persuade, advocate, and convince them, make them see the other side and trust each other.

<!-- @segment an10.33:1.9 -->

They’re skilled in the instigation and settlement of disciplinary issues.

<!-- @segment an10.33:1.10 -->

They know what a disciplinary issue is.

<!-- @segment an10.33:1.11 -->

They know how a disciplinary issue originates.

<!-- @segment an10.33:1.12 -->

They know how a disciplinary issue ceases.

<!-- @segment an10.33:1.13 -->

They know the practical way leading to the cessation of a disciplinary issue.

<!-- @segment an10.33:1.14 -->

A mendicant should possess these ten qualities to be deemed a judge.”
