---
slug: an10.58
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Rooted
---

<!-- @segment an10.58:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, if wanderers of other religions were to ask:

<!-- @segment an10.58:1.2 -->

‘Reverends, all things have what as their root? What produces them? What is their origin? What is their meeting place? What is their chief? What is their ruler? What is their overseer? What is their core? What is their objective? What is their culmination?’ How would you answer them?”

<!-- @segment an10.58:1.3 -->

“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge. Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The mendicants will listen and remember it.”

<!-- @segment an10.58:2.1 -->

“Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment an10.58:2.2 -->

“Yes, sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment an10.58:2.3 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment an10.58:3.1 -->

“Mendicants, if wanderers of other religions were to ask:

<!-- @segment an10.58:3.2 -->

‘Reverends, all things have what as their root? What produces them? What is their origin? What is their meeting place? What is their chief? What is their ruler? What is their overseer? What is their core? What is their objective? What is their culmination?’

<!-- @segment an10.58:3.3 -->

You should answer them:

<!-- @segment an10.58:3.4 -->

‘Reverends, all things are rooted in desire. They are produced by application of mind. Contact is their origin. Feeling is their meeting place. Immersion is their chief. Mindfulness is their ruler. Wisdom is their overseer. Freedom is their core. Their objective is freedom from death. And extinguishment is their culmination.’

<!-- @segment an10.58:3.5 -->

When questioned by wanderers of other religions, that’s how you should answer them.”
