---
slug: an10.220
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Unprincipled Conduct
---

<!-- @segment an10.220:1.1 -->

Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment an10.220:1.2 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

<!-- @segment an10.220:1.3 -->

“What is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell?”

<!-- @segment an10.220:1.4 -->

“Unprincipled and immoral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.”

<!-- @segment an10.220:2.1 -->

“But what is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm?”

<!-- @segment an10.220:2.2 -->

“Principled and moral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.”

<!-- @segment an10.220:3.1 -->

“I don’t understand the detailed meaning of what the worthy Gotama has said in brief.

<!-- @segment an10.220:3.2 -->

Please, worthy Gotama, teach me this matter so I can understand the detailed meaning.”

<!-- @segment an10.220:3.3 -->

“Well then, brahmin, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment an10.220:3.4 -->

“Yes, worthy sir,” the brahmin replied.

<!-- @segment an10.220:3.5 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment an10.220:4.1 -->

“Brahmin, unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of body,

<!-- @segment an10.220:4.2 -->

fourfold by way of speech,

<!-- @segment an10.220:4.3 -->

and threefold by way of mind.

<!-- @segment an10.220:5.1 -->

And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct threefold by way of body? …

<!-- @segment an10.220:5.2 -->

That’s how unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of body.

<!-- @segment an10.220:6.1 -->

And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct fourfold by way of speech? …

<!-- @segment an10.220:6.2 -->

That’s how unprincipled and immoral conduct is fourfold by way of speech.

<!-- @segment an10.220:7.1 -->

And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct threefold by way of mind? …

<!-- @segment an10.220:7.2 -->

That’s how unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of mind.

<!-- @segment an10.220:7.3 -->

That’s how unprincipled and immoral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.

<!-- @segment an10.220:8.1 -->

Principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of body,

<!-- @segment an10.220:8.2 -->

fourfold by way of speech,

<!-- @segment an10.220:8.3 -->

and threefold by way of mind.

<!-- @segment an10.220:9.1 -->

And how is principled and moral conduct threefold by way of body? …

<!-- @segment an10.220:9.2 -->

That’s how principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of body.

<!-- @segment an10.220:10.1 -->

And how is principled and moral conduct fourfold by way of speech? …

<!-- @segment an10.220:10.2 -->

That’s how principled and moral conduct is fourfold by way of speech.

<!-- @segment an10.220:11.1 -->

And how is principled and moral conduct threefold by way of mind? …

<!-- @segment an10.220:11.2 -->

That’s how principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of mind.

<!-- @segment an10.220:11.3 -->

That’s how principled and moral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.”

<!-- @segment an10.220:12.1 -->

“Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! …

<!-- @segment an10.220:12.2 -->

From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”

<!-- @segment an10.220:12.3 -->
