---
slug: an10.92
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Dangers
---

<!-- @segment an10.92:1.1 -->

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

<!-- @segment an10.92:2.1 -->

“Householder, when a noble disciple has quelled five fears and enmities, possesses the four factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and penetrated the noble system with wisdom, they may, if they wish, declare of themselves:

<!-- @segment an10.92:2.2 -->

‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am assured, destined for awakening.’

<!-- @segment an10.92:3.1 -->

What are the five fears and enmities they have quelled?

<!-- @segment an10.92:3.2 -->

Anyone who kills living creatures brims with fear and enmity both in this life and in lives to come, and experiences mental pain and sadness. Anyone who refrains from killing living creatures does not brim with fear and enmity either in this life or in lives to come, and doesn’t experience mental pain and sadness.

<!-- @segment an10.92:3.3 -->

So that fear and enmity is quelled for anyone who refrains from killing living creatures.

<!-- @segment an10.92:4.1 -->

Anyone who steals …

<!-- @segment an10.92:4.2 -->

Anyone who commits sexual misconduct …

<!-- @segment an10.92:4.3 -->

Anyone who lies …

<!-- @segment an10.92:4.4 -->

Anyone who consumes intoxicants of beer, wine, and liquor creates dangers and threats both in this life and in lives to come, and experiences mental pain and sadness. Anyone who refrains from intoxicants of beer, wine, and liquor creates no dangers and threats either in this life or in lives to come, and doesn’t experience mental pain and sadness.

<!-- @segment an10.92:4.5 -->

So that danger and threat is quelled for anyone who refrains from intoxicants of beer, wine, and liquor.

<!-- @segment an10.92:4.6 -->

These are the five fears and enmities they have quelled.

<!-- @segment an10.92:5.1 -->

What are the four factors of stream-entry that they possess?

<!-- @segment an10.92:5.2 -->

It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha:

<!-- @segment an10.92:5.3 -->

‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’

<!-- @segment an10.92:5.4 -->

They have experiential confidence in the teaching:

<!-- @segment an10.92:5.5 -->

‘The teaching is well explained by the Buddha—apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.’

<!-- @segment an10.92:5.6 -->

They have experiential confidence in the Saṅgha:

<!-- @segment an10.92:5.7 -->

‘The Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples is practicing the way that’s good, direct, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight individual persons. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with cupped palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.’

<!-- @segment an10.92:5.8 -->

And a noble disciple’s ethical conduct is loved by the noble ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion.

<!-- @segment an10.92:5.9 -->

These are the four factors of stream-entry that they possess.

<!-- @segment an10.92:6.1 -->

And what is the noble system that they have clearly seen and penetrated with wisdom?

<!-- @segment an10.92:6.2 -->

It’s when a noble disciple reflects:

<!-- @segment an10.92:6.3 -->

‘When this exists, this comes to be; due to the arising of this, this arises.

<!-- @segment an10.92:6.4 -->

When this doesn’t exist, this doesn’t come to be; due to the cessation of this, this ceases. That is:

<!-- @segment an10.92:6.5 -->

Ignorance is a requirement for choices.

<!-- @segment an10.92:6.6 -->

Choices are a requirement for consciousness.

<!-- @segment an10.92:6.7 -->

Consciousness is a requirement for name and form.

<!-- @segment an10.92:6.8 -->

Name and form are requirements for the six sense fields.

<!-- @segment an10.92:6.9 -->

The six sense fields are requirements for contact.

<!-- @segment an10.92:6.10 -->

Contact is a requirement for feeling.

<!-- @segment an10.92:6.11 -->

Feeling is a requirement for craving.

<!-- @segment an10.92:6.12 -->

Craving is a requirement for grasping.

<!-- @segment an10.92:6.13 -->

Grasping is a requirement for continued existence.

<!-- @segment an10.92:6.14 -->

Continued existence is a requirement for rebirth.

<!-- @segment an10.92:6.15 -->

Rebirth is a requirement for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be.

<!-- @segment an10.92:6.16 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

<!-- @segment an10.92:6.17 -->

When ignorance fades away and ceases no residue left behind, choices cease. When choices cease, consciousness ceases. When consciousness ceases, name and form cease. When name and form cease, the six sense fields cease. When the six sense fields cease, contact ceases. When contact ceases, feeling ceases. When feeling ceases, craving ceases. When craving ceases, grasping ceases. When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases. When rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease.

<!-- @segment an10.92:6.18 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.’

<!-- @segment an10.92:6.19 -->

This is the noble system that they have clearly seen and penetrated with wisdom.

<!-- @segment an10.92:7.1 -->

When a noble disciple has quelled five dangers and threats, possesses the four factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and comprehended the noble system with wisdom, they may, if they wish, declare of themselves:

<!-- @segment an10.92:7.2 -->

‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am assured, destined for awakening.’”
