---
slug: an10.95
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Uttiya
description: The Buddha teaches the wanderer on with uttiya, presenting a tenfold teaching for disciples on the path.
qualities: truth, suffering, insight, mindfulness, wisdom, harm
theme: principle
---

<!-- @segment an10.95:1.1 -->

Then the wanderer Uttiya went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment an10.95:1.2 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment an10.95:1.3 -->

“Worthy Gotama, is this right: ‘The cosmos is eternal. This is the only truth, anything else is futile’?”

<!-- @segment an10.95:1.4 -->

“This has not been declared by me, Uttiya.”

<!-- @segment an10.95:1.5 -->



<!-- @segment an10.95:2.1 -->

“Then is this right: ‘The cosmos is not eternal. This is the only truth, anything else is futile’?”

<!-- @segment an10.95:2.2 -->

“This has not been declared by me, Uttiya.”

<!-- @segment an10.95:2.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.95:3.1 -->

“Then is this right: ‘The cosmos is finite …’ …

<!-- @segment an10.95:3.2 -->

‘The cosmos is infinite …’ …

<!-- @segment an10.95:3.3 -->

‘The soul and the body are one and the same …’ …

<!-- @segment an10.95:3.4 -->

‘The soul is one thing, the body another …’ …

<!-- @segment an10.95:3.5 -->

‘A realized one still exists after death …’ …

<!-- @segment an10.95:3.6 -->

‘A realized one no longer exists after death …’ …

<!-- @segment an10.95:3.7 -->

‘A realized one both still exists and no longer exists after death …’ …

<!-- @segment an10.95:3.8 -->

‘A Realized One neither exists nor doesn’t exist after death. This is the only truth, anything else is futile’?”

<!-- @segment an10.95:3.9 -->

“This has not been declared by me, Uttiya.”

<!-- @segment an10.95:3.10 -->



<!-- @segment an10.95:4.1 -->

“When asked about all these points, worthy Gotama says that they have not been declared by him.

<!-- @segment an10.95:4.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.95:5.1 -->



<!-- @segment an10.95:5.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.95:6.1 -->



<!-- @segment an10.95:6.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.95:6.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.95:6.4 -->



<!-- @segment an10.95:6.5 -->



<!-- @segment an10.95:6.6 -->



<!-- @segment an10.95:6.7 -->



<!-- @segment an10.95:6.8 -->



<!-- @segment an10.95:6.9 -->



<!-- @segment an10.95:6.10 -->



<!-- @segment an10.95:6.11 -->

So what then has been declared by Mister Gotama?”

<!-- @segment an10.95:7.1 -->

“Uttiya, I teach my disciples from my own insight in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to end the cycle of suffering, and to realize extinguishment.”

<!-- @segment an10.95:8.1 -->

“But when the worthy Gotama teaches in this way, is the whole world saved, or half, or a third?”

<!-- @segment an10.95:8.2 -->

But when he said this, the Buddha kept silent.

<!-- @segment an10.95:9.1 -->

Then Venerable Ānanda thought,

<!-- @segment an10.95:9.2 -->

“The wanderer Uttiya must not get the harmful misconception:

<!-- @segment an10.95:9.3 -->

‘When the ascetic Gotama was asked this all-important question he falters without answering. He just can’t do it!’

<!-- @segment an10.95:9.4 -->

That would be for his lasting harm and suffering.”

<!-- @segment an10.95:10.1 -->

Then Ānanda said to the wanderer Uttiya,

<!-- @segment an10.95:10.2 -->

“Well then, Reverend Uttiya, I shall give you a simile.

<!-- @segment an10.95:10.3 -->

For by means of a simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

<!-- @segment an10.95:10.4 -->

Suppose there was a king’s frontier citadel with fortified embankments, ramparts, and arches, and a single gate.

<!-- @segment an10.95:10.5 -->

And it has a gatekeeper who is astute, competent, and clever. He keeps strangers out and lets known people in.

<!-- @segment an10.95:10.6 -->

As he walks around the patrol path, he doesn’t see a hole or cleft in the wall, not even one big enough for a cat to slip out.

<!-- @segment an10.95:10.7 -->

He doesn’t know how many creatures enter or leave the citadel.

<!-- @segment an10.95:10.8 -->

But he does know that whatever sizable creatures enter or leave the citadel, all of them do so via this gate.

<!-- @segment an10.95:11.1 -->

In the same way, it’s not the Realized One’s concern whether the whole world is saved by this, or half, or a third.

<!-- @segment an10.95:11.2 -->

But the Realized One knows that whoever is saved from the world—whether in the past, the future, or the present—all have given up the five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom. They have firmly established their mind in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. And they have truly developed the seven awakening factors.

<!-- @segment an10.95:11.3 -->

That’s how they’re saved from the world, in the past, future, or present.

<!-- @segment an10.95:11.4 -->

Uttiya, you were just asking the Buddha the same question as before in a different way.

<!-- @segment an10.95:11.5 -->

That’s why he didn’t answer.”
