---
slug: an10.52
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Sāriputta
description: The Buddha teaches on with sāriputta, presenting a tenfold teaching for disciples on the path.
qualities: vigour, mindfulness, drowsiness, dullness, harm, unwholesome
theme: training guideline
---

<!-- @segment an10.52:1.1 -->

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment an10.52:1.2 -->

“Reverends, mendicants!”

<!-- @segment an10.52:1.3 -->

“Reverend,” they replied.

<!-- @segment an10.52:1.4 -->

Sāriputta said this:

<!-- @segment an10.52:2.1 -->

“Reverends, if a mendicant isn’t skilled in encompassing another’s mind, then they should train themselves: ‘I will be skilled in encompassing my own mind.’

<!-- @segment an10.52:2.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.52:3.1 -->

And how is a mendicant skilled in encompassing their own mind?

<!-- @segment an10.52:3.2 -->

Suppose there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror or a clear bowl of water. If they see any dirt or blemish there, they’d try to remove it.

<!-- @segment an10.52:3.3 -->

But if they don’t see any dirt or blemish there, they’re happy with that, as they’ve got all they wished for:

<!-- @segment an10.52:3.4 -->

‘How fortunate that I’m clean!’

<!-- @segment an10.52:4.1 -->

In the same way, checking is very helpful for a mendicant’s skillful qualities.

<!-- @segment an10.52:4.2 -->

‘Am I often covetous or not? Am I often malicious or not? Am I often overcome with dullness and drowsiness or not? Am I often restless or not? Am I often doubtful or not? Am I often irritable or not? Am I often corrupted in mind or not? Am I often disturbed in body or not? Am I often energetic or not? Am I often immersed in samādhi or not?’

<!-- @segment an10.52:5.1 -->

Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this:

<!-- @segment an10.52:5.2 -->

‘I am often covetous, malicious, overcome with dullness and drowsiness, restless, doubtful, irritable, defiled in mind, disturbed in body, lazy, and not immersed in samādhi.’ In order to give up those bad, unskillful qualities, they should apply extraordinary enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness.

<!-- @segment an10.52:5.3 -->

Suppose your clothes or head were on fire. In order to extinguish it, you’d apply extraordinary enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness.

<!-- @segment an10.52:5.4 -->

In the same way, in order to give up those bad, unskillful qualities, that mendicant should apply extraordinary enthusiasm …

<!-- @segment an10.52:6.1 -->

But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this:

<!-- @segment an10.52:6.2 -->

‘I am often content, kind-hearted, rid of dullness and drowsiness, calm, confident, loving, pure in mind, undisturbed in body, energetic, and immersed in samādhi.’ Grounded on those skillful qualities, they should practice meditation further to end the defilements.”
