---
slug: an10.93
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: What is Your View?
description: The Buddha teaches the householder on what is your view?, presenting a tenfold teaching for disciples on the path.
qualities: suffering, truth, wholesome, wisdom, with nothing, wrong view
theme: story, urgency
---

<!-- @segment an10.93:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment an10.93:1.2 -->

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika left Sāvatthī in the middle of the day to see the Buddha.

<!-- @segment an10.93:1.3 -->

Then it occurred to him,

<!-- @segment an10.93:1.4 -->

“It’s the wrong time to see the Buddha,

<!-- @segment an10.93:1.5 -->

as he’s in retreat.

<!-- @segment an10.93:1.6 -->

And it’s the wrong time to see the esteemed mendicants,

<!-- @segment an10.93:1.7 -->

as they’re in retreat.

<!-- @segment an10.93:1.8 -->

Why don’t I visit the monastery of the wanderers of other religions?”

<!-- @segment an10.93:2.1 -->

Then he went to the monastery of the wanderers of other religions.

<!-- @segment an10.93:2.2 -->

Now at that time, the wanderers of other religions had come together, making an uproar, a colossal racket as they sat and talked about all kinds of low topics.

<!-- @segment an10.93:2.3 -->

They saw Anāthapiṇḍika coming off in the distance,

<!-- @segment an10.93:2.4 -->

and stopped each other, saying,

<!-- @segment an10.93:2.5 -->

“Be quiet, good fellows, don’t make a sound.

<!-- @segment an10.93:2.6 -->

The householder Anāthapiṇḍika, a disciple of the ascetic Gotama, is coming into our monastery.

<!-- @segment an10.93:2.7 -->

He is included among the white-clothed lay disciples of the ascetic Gotama, who is residing in Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment an10.93:2.8 -->

Such venerables like the quiet, are educated to be quiet, and praise the quiet.

<!-- @segment an10.93:2.9 -->

Hopefully if he sees that our assembly is quiet he’ll see fit to approach.”

<!-- @segment an10.93:3.1 -->

Then those wanderers of other religions fell silent.

<!-- @segment an10.93:3.2 -->

Then Anāthapiṇḍika went up to them, and exchanged greetings with those wanderers.

<!-- @segment an10.93:3.3 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side. The wanderers said to him,

<!-- @segment an10.93:3.4 -->

“Tell us, householder, what is the view of the ascetic Gotama?”

<!-- @segment an10.93:3.5 -->

“Sirs, I don’t know all his views.”

<!-- @segment an10.93:4.1 -->

“Well then, since it seems you don’t know all the views of the ascetic Gotama,

<!-- @segment an10.93:4.2 -->

tell us, what are the views of the mendicants?”

<!-- @segment an10.93:4.3 -->

“Sirs, I don’t know all the mendicants’ views.”

<!-- @segment an10.93:5.1 -->

“Well then, since it seems you don’t know all the views of the ascetic Gotama or of the mendicants,

<!-- @segment an10.93:5.2 -->

tell us, householder, what is your view?”

<!-- @segment an10.93:5.3 -->

“Sirs, it’s not hard for me to explain what my views are.

<!-- @segment an10.93:5.4 -->

But please, let the venerables explain their own convictions first. Afterwards it won’t be hard for me to explain my views.”

<!-- @segment an10.93:6.1 -->

When he said this, one of the wanderers said to him,

<!-- @segment an10.93:6.2 -->

“The cosmos is eternal. This is the only truth, anything else is futile.

<!-- @segment an10.93:6.3 -->

That’s my view, householder.”

<!-- @segment an10.93:7.1 -->

Another wanderer said,

<!-- @segment an10.93:7.2 -->

“The cosmos is not eternal. This is the only truth, anything else is futile.

<!-- @segment an10.93:7.3 -->

That’s my view, householder.”

<!-- @segment an10.93:8.1 -->

Another wanderer said,

<!-- @segment an10.93:8.2 -->

“The cosmos is finite …” …

<!-- @segment an10.93:8.3 -->

“The cosmos is infinite …” …

<!-- @segment an10.93:8.4 -->

“The soul and the body are one and the same …” …

<!-- @segment an10.93:8.5 -->

“The soul is one thing, the body another …” …

<!-- @segment an10.93:8.6 -->

“A realized one still exists after death …” …

<!-- @segment an10.93:8.7 -->

“A realized one no longer exists after death …” …

<!-- @segment an10.93:8.8 -->

“A realized one both still exists and no longer exists after death …” …

<!-- @segment an10.93:8.9 -->

“A Realized One neither exists nor doesn’t exist after death. This is the only truth, anything else is futile.

<!-- @segment an10.93:8.10 -->

That’s my view, householder.”

<!-- @segment an10.93:9.1 -->

When this was said, Anāthapiṇḍika said this,

<!-- @segment an10.93:9.2 -->

“Sirs, regarding the venerable who said this:

<!-- @segment an10.93:9.3 -->

‘The cosmos is eternal. This is the only truth, anything else is futile.

<!-- @segment an10.93:9.4 -->

That’s my view, householder.’

<!-- @segment an10.93:9.5 -->

This view of his has either arisen from his own irrational application of mind, or is conditioned by what someone else says.

<!-- @segment an10.93:9.6 -->

But that view is created, conditioned, chosen, dependently originated.

<!-- @segment an10.93:9.7 -->

Whatever is created, conditioned, chosen, and dependently originated is impermanent.

<!-- @segment an10.93:9.8 -->

And what’s impermanent is suffering.

<!-- @segment an10.93:9.9 -->

What he clings to and holds to is just suffering.

<!-- @segment an10.93:10.1 -->

Regarding the venerable who said this:

<!-- @segment an10.93:10.2 -->

‘The cosmos is not eternal. This is the only truth, anything else is futile.

<!-- @segment an10.93:10.3 -->

That’s my view, householder.’

<!-- @segment an10.93:10.4 -->

This view of his has either arisen from his own irrational application of mind, or is conditioned by what someone else says.

<!-- @segment an10.93:10.5 -->

But that view is created, conditioned, chosen, dependently originated.

<!-- @segment an10.93:10.6 -->

Whatever is created, conditioned, chosen, and dependently originated is impermanent.

<!-- @segment an10.93:10.7 -->

And what’s impermanent is suffering.

<!-- @segment an10.93:10.8 -->

What he clings to and holds to is just suffering.

<!-- @segment an10.93:11.1 -->

Regarding the venerable who said this:

<!-- @segment an10.93:11.2 -->

‘The cosmos is finite …’ …

<!-- @segment an10.93:11.3 -->

‘The cosmos is infinite …’ …

<!-- @segment an10.93:11.4 -->

‘The soul and the body are one and the same …’ …

<!-- @segment an10.93:11.5 -->

‘The soul is one thing, the body another …’ …

<!-- @segment an10.93:11.6 -->

‘A realized one still exists after death …’ …

<!-- @segment an10.93:11.7 -->

‘A realized one no longer exists after death …’ …

<!-- @segment an10.93:11.8 -->

‘A realized one both still exists and no longer exists after death …’ …

<!-- @segment an10.93:11.9 -->

‘A Realized One neither exists nor doesn’t exist after death. This is the only truth, anything else is futile.

<!-- @segment an10.93:11.10 -->

That’s my view, householder.’

<!-- @segment an10.93:11.11 -->

This view of his has either arisen from his own irrational application of mind, or is conditioned by what someone else says.

<!-- @segment an10.93:11.12 -->

But that view is created, conditioned, chosen, dependently originated.

<!-- @segment an10.93:11.13 -->

Whatever is created, conditioned, chosen, and dependently originated is impermanent.

<!-- @segment an10.93:11.14 -->

And what’s impermanent is suffering.

<!-- @segment an10.93:11.15 -->

What he clings to and holds to is just suffering.”

<!-- @segment an10.93:12.1 -->

When he said this the wanderers said to him,

<!-- @segment an10.93:12.2 -->

“Householder, we’ve each explained our own convictions.

<!-- @segment an10.93:12.3 -->

Tell us, householder, what is your view?”

<!-- @segment an10.93:12.4 -->

“Sirs, whatever is created, conditioned, chosen, and dependently originated is impermanent.

<!-- @segment an10.93:12.5 -->

And what’s impermanent is suffering.

<!-- @segment an10.93:12.6 -->

And what’s suffering is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.

<!-- @segment an10.93:12.7 -->

That’s my view, sirs.”

<!-- @segment an10.93:13.1 -->

“Householder, whatever is created, conditioned, chosen, and dependently originated is impermanent.

<!-- @segment an10.93:13.2 -->

And what’s impermanent is suffering.

<!-- @segment an10.93:13.3 -->

What you cling to and hold to is just suffering.”

<!-- @segment an10.93:14.1 -->

“Sirs, whatever is created, conditioned, chosen, and dependently originated is impermanent.

<!-- @segment an10.93:14.2 -->

And what’s impermanent is suffering.

<!-- @segment an10.93:14.3 -->

And I’ve truly seen clearly with right wisdom that what’s suffering is not mine, I am not this, it’s not my self.

<!-- @segment an10.93:14.4 -->

And I truly understand the escape beyond that.”

<!-- @segment an10.93:15.1 -->

When this was said, those wanderers sat silent, dismayed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say.

<!-- @segment an10.93:15.2 -->

Seeing this, Anāthapiṇḍika rose from his seat. He went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and informed the Buddha of all they had discussed.

<!-- @segment an10.93:15.3 -->

“Good, good, householder!

<!-- @segment an10.93:15.4 -->

That’s how you should legitimately and completely refute those futile men from time to time.”

<!-- @segment an10.93:16.1 -->

Then the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired the householder Anāthapiṇḍika with a Dhamma talk,

<!-- @segment an10.93:16.2 -->

after which Anāthapiṇḍika rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha before leaving.

<!-- @segment an10.93:17.1 -->

Then, not long after Anāthapiṇḍika had left, the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment an10.93:17.2 -->

“Mendicants, even a mendicant who has ordained for a hundred years in this teaching and training would legitimately and completely refute those wanderers of other religions just as the householder Anāthapiṇḍika did.”
