---
slug: an10.40
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Ānanda (2nd)
description: The Buddha teaches on with ānanda (2nd), presenting a tenfold teaching for disciples on the path.
qualities: merit, safety, harm
theme: recollection of the Buddha, training guideline
---

<!-- @segment an10.40:1.1 -->

“Sir, they speak of ‘harmony in the Saṅgha’.

<!-- @segment an10.40:1.2 -->

How is harmony in the Saṅgha defined?”

<!-- @segment an10.40:1.3 -->

“Ānanda, it’s when a mendicant explains what is not the teaching as not the teaching, and what is the teaching as the teaching. They explain what is not the training as not the training, and what is the training as the training. They explain what was not spoken and stated by the Realized One as not spoken and stated by the Realized One, and what was spoken and stated by the Realized One as spoken and stated by the Realized One. They explain what was not practiced by the Realized One as not practiced by the Realized One, and what was practiced by the Realized One as practiced by the Realized One. They explain what was not prescribed by the Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One, and what was prescribed by the Realized One as prescribed by the Realized One.

<!-- @segment an10.40:1.4 -->

On these ten grounds they don’t split off and go their own way. They don’t perform legal acts autonomously or recite the monastic code autonomously.

<!-- @segment an10.40:1.5 -->

That is how harmony in the Saṅgha is defined.”

<!-- @segment an10.40:2.1 -->

“But sir, what does someone who has forged harmony in a schismatic Saṅgha brim with?”

<!-- @segment an10.40:2.2 -->

“They brim with divine merit.”

<!-- @segment an10.40:2.3 -->

“But what is divine merit?”

<!-- @segment an10.40:2.4 -->

“They rejoice in heaven for an eon, Ānanda.

<!-- @segment an10.40:3.1 -->

A Saṅgha in harmony is happy,

<!-- @segment an10.40:3.2 -->

as is support for those in harmony.

<!-- @segment an10.40:3.3 -->

Taking a stand on the teaching,

<!-- @segment an10.40:3.4 -->

favoring harmony, they ruin no sanctuary.

<!-- @segment an10.40:3.5 -->

After forging harmony in the Saṅgha,

<!-- @segment an10.40:3.6 -->

they rejoice in heaven for an eon.”

<!-- @segment an10.40:3.7 -->



<!-- @segment an10.40:3.8 -->



<!-- @segment an10.40:4.1 -->



<!-- @segment an10.40:4.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.40:4.3 -->
