---
slug: an10.50
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Fights
description: The Buddha teaches on fights, presenting a tenfold teaching for disciples on the path.
qualities: wholesome, respect, affection, learned, mindfulness, feuding
theme: story, training guideline
---

<!-- @segment an10.50:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment an10.50:1.2 -->

Now at that time, after the meal, on return from almsround, several mendicants sat together in the assembly hall. They were fighting, quarreling, and disputing, wounding each other with barbed words.

<!-- @segment an10.50:2.1 -->

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to the assembly hall. He sat down on the seat spread out,

<!-- @segment an10.50:2.2 -->

and addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment an10.50:2.3 -->

“Mendicants, what were you sitting talking about just now? What conversation was left unfinished?”

<!-- @segment an10.50:3.1 -->

“Sir, after the meal, on return from almsround, we sat together in the assembly hall, fighting, quarreling, and disputing, wounding each other with barbed words.”

<!-- @segment an10.50:3.2 -->

“Mendicants, this is not appropriate for you gentlemen who have gone forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment an10.50:4.1 -->

There are ten warm-hearted qualities that make for fondness and respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without dispute.

<!-- @segment an10.50:4.2 -->

What ten?

<!-- @segment an10.50:4.3 -->

Firstly, a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken.

<!-- @segment an10.50:4.4 -->

When a mendicant is ethical,

<!-- @segment an10.50:4.5 -->

this warm-hearted quality makes for fondness and respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without dispute.

<!-- @segment an10.50:5.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant is very learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and penetrating them theoretically. …

<!-- @segment an10.50:5.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.50:5.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.50:6.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant has good friends, companions, and associates. …

<!-- @segment an10.50:6.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.50:6.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.50:7.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant is easy to admonish, having qualities that make them easy to admonish. They’re patient, and take instruction respectfully. …

<!-- @segment an10.50:7.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.50:7.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.50:8.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant is deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of duties for their spiritual companions, understanding how to go about things in order to complete and organize the work. …

<!-- @segment an10.50:8.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.50:8.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.50:9.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant loves the teachings and is a delight to converse with, being full of joy in the teaching and training. …

<!-- @segment an10.50:9.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.50:9.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.50:10.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. …

<!-- @segment an10.50:10.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.50:10.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.50:11.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. …

<!-- @segment an10.50:11.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.50:11.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.50:12.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant is mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long ago. …

<!-- @segment an10.50:12.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.50:12.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.50:13.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering.

<!-- @segment an10.50:13.2 -->

When a mendicant is wise,

<!-- @segment an10.50:13.3 -->

this warm-hearted quality makes for fondness and respect, helping the Saṅgha to live in harmony and unity, without quarreling.

<!-- @segment an10.50:14.1 -->

These ten warm-hearted qualities make for fondness and respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without dispute.”

<!-- @segment an10.50:14.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.50:14.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.50:15.1 -->



<!-- @segment an10.50:15.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.50:15.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.50:15.4 -->
