---
slug: an10.4
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Vital Conditions (2nd)
description: The Buddha teaches on vital conditions (2nd), presenting a tenfold teaching for disciples on the path.
qualities: quenching, vision, dispassion, joy, liberation, ethical conduct
theme: inspiration, wisdom
---

<!-- @segment an10.4:1.1 -->

There Venerable Sāriputta addressed the mendicants …

<!-- @segment an10.4:1.2 -->

“Reverends, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a vital condition for having no regrets.

<!-- @segment an10.4:1.3 -->

When there are regrets, one who has regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy. …

<!-- @segment an10.4:1.4 -->

One who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

<!-- @segment an10.4:1.5 -->

Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness.

<!-- @segment an10.4:1.6 -->

In the same way, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a vital condition for having no regrets.

<!-- @segment an10.4:1.7 -->

When there are regrets, one who has regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy. …

<!-- @segment an10.4:1.8 -->

One who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

<!-- @segment an10.4:2.1 -->

An ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital condition for not having regrets.

<!-- @segment an10.4:2.2 -->

When there are no regrets, one who has no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy. …

<!-- @segment an10.4:2.3 -->

One who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

<!-- @segment an10.4:2.4 -->

Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage. Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would grow to fullness.

<!-- @segment an10.4:2.5 -->

In the same way, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital condition for not having regrets.

<!-- @segment an10.4:2.6 -->

When there are no regrets, one who has no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy. …

<!-- @segment an10.4:2.7 -->

One who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.”
