---
slug: an10.107
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Bone-Washing Ceremony
---

<!-- @segment an10.107:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, in the southern lands there is a ceremony named ‘bone-washing’.

<!-- @segment an10.107:1.2 -->

There they have food, drink, snacks, meals, refreshments, and beverages, as well as dancing, singing, and music.

<!-- @segment an10.107:1.3 -->

There is such a washing, I don’t deny it.

<!-- @segment an10.107:1.4 -->

But that washing is low, crude, ordinary, ignoble, and pointless. It doesn’t lead to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.

<!-- @segment an10.107:2.1 -->

I will teach a noble washing that leads solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. Relying on that washing, sentient beings who are liable to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are freed from all these things.

<!-- @segment an10.107:2.2 -->

Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment an10.107:2.3 -->

“Yes, sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment an10.107:2.4 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment an10.107:3.1 -->

“And what is that noble washing?

<!-- @segment an10.107:4.1 -->

For one of right view, wrong view is washed away.

<!-- @segment an10.107:4.2 -->

And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong view are washed away.

<!-- @segment an10.107:4.3 -->

And because of right view, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

<!-- @segment an10.107:5.1 -->

For one of right purpose, wrong purpose is washed away. …

<!-- @segment an10.107:5.2 -->

For one of right speech, wrong speech is washed away. …

<!-- @segment an10.107:5.3 -->

For one of right action, wrong action is washed away. …

<!-- @segment an10.107:5.4 -->

For one of right livelihood, wrong livelihood is washed away. …

<!-- @segment an10.107:5.5 -->

For one of right effort, wrong effort is washed away. …

<!-- @segment an10.107:5.6 -->

For one of right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is washed away. …

<!-- @segment an10.107:5.7 -->

For one of right immersion, wrong immersion is washed away. …

<!-- @segment an10.107:5.8 -->

For one of right knowledge, wrong knowledge is washed away. …

<!-- @segment an10.107:6.1 -->

For one of right freedom, wrong freedom is washed away.

<!-- @segment an10.107:6.2 -->

And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong freedom are washed away.

<!-- @segment an10.107:6.3 -->

And because of right freedom, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

<!-- @segment an10.107:6.4 -->

This is the noble washing that leads solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. Relying on this washing, sentient beings who are liable to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are freed from all these things.”
