---
slug: an10.177
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Jānussoṇi
---

<!-- @segment an10.177:1.1 -->

Then the brahmin Jānussoṇi went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment an10.177:1.2 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment an10.177:2.1 -->

“We who are known as brahmins

<!-- @segment an10.177:2.2 -->

give gifts and perform memorial rites for the dead:

<!-- @segment an10.177:2.3 -->

‘May this gift aid my departed relatives and kin. May they partake of this gift.’

<!-- @segment an10.177:2.4 -->

But does this gift really aid departed relatives and kin?

<!-- @segment an10.177:2.5 -->

Do they actually partake of it?”

<!-- @segment an10.177:2.6 -->

“It aids them if the conditions are right, brahmin, but not if the conditions are wrong.”

<!-- @segment an10.177:3.1 -->

“Then, worthy Gotama, what are the right and wrong conditions?”

<!-- @segment an10.177:3.2 -->

“Brahmin, take someone who kills living creatures, steals, and commits sexual misconduct. They use speech that’s false, backbiting, harsh, or nonsensical. And they’re covetous, malicious, with wrong view.

<!-- @segment an10.177:3.3 -->

When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in hell.

<!-- @segment an10.177:3.4 -->

There they survive feeding on the food of the hell beings.

<!-- @segment an10.177:3.5 -->

The conditions there are wrong, so the gift does not aid the one who lives there.

<!-- @segment an10.177:4.1 -->

Take someone else who kills living creatures … and has wrong view.

<!-- @segment an10.177:4.2 -->

When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the animal realm.

<!-- @segment an10.177:4.3 -->

There they survive feeding on the food of the beings in the animal realm.

<!-- @segment an10.177:4.4 -->

The conditions there too are wrong, so the gift does not aid the one who lives there.

<!-- @segment an10.177:5.1 -->

Take someone else who doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or use speech that’s false, backbiting, harsh, or nonsensical. They’re contented, kind-hearted, and have right view.

<!-- @segment an10.177:5.2 -->

When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the human realm.

<!-- @segment an10.177:5.3 -->

There they survive feeding on human food.

<!-- @segment an10.177:5.4 -->

The conditions there too are wrong, so the gift does not aid the one who lives there.

<!-- @segment an10.177:6.1 -->

Take someone else who doesn’t kill living creatures … and has right view.

<!-- @segment an10.177:6.2 -->

When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of the gods.

<!-- @segment an10.177:6.3 -->

There they survive feeding on the food of the gods.

<!-- @segment an10.177:6.4 -->

The conditions there too are wrong, so the gift does not aid the one who lives there.

<!-- @segment an10.177:7.1 -->

Take someone else who kills living creatures … and has wrong view.

<!-- @segment an10.177:7.2 -->

When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the ghost realm.

<!-- @segment an10.177:7.3 -->

There they survive feeding on the food of the beings in the ghost realm. Or else they survive feeding on what friends and colleagues, relatives and kin provide them with from here.

<!-- @segment an10.177:7.4 -->

The conditions there are right, so the gift aids the one who lives there.”

<!-- @segment an10.177:8.1 -->

“But worthy Gotama, who partakes of that gift if the departed relative is not reborn in that place?”

<!-- @segment an10.177:8.2 -->

“Other departed relatives reborn there will partake of that gift.”

<!-- @segment an10.177:9.1 -->

“But who partakes of the gift when neither that relative nor other relatives have been reborn in that place?”

<!-- @segment an10.177:9.2 -->

“It’s impossible, brahmin, it cannot happen that that place is vacant of departed relatives in all this long time.

<!-- @segment an10.177:9.3 -->

It’s never fruitless for the donor.”

<!-- @segment an10.177:10.1 -->

“Does the worthy Gotama propose this even when the conditions are wrong?”

<!-- @segment an10.177:10.2 -->

“I propose this even when the conditions are wrong.

<!-- @segment an10.177:10.3 -->

Take someone who kills living creatures, steals, and commits sexual misconduct. They use speech that’s false, backbiting, harsh, or nonsensical. And they’re covetous, malicious, with wrong view.

<!-- @segment an10.177:10.4 -->

They give to ascetics or brahmins such things as food, drink, clothing, vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and lighting.

<!-- @segment an10.177:10.5 -->

When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of elephants.

<!-- @segment an10.177:10.6 -->

There they get to have food and drink, garlands and various adornments.

<!-- @segment an10.177:11.1 -->

Since in this life they killed living creatures … and had wrong view, they were reborn in the company of elephants.

<!-- @segment an10.177:11.2 -->

Since they gave to ascetics or brahmins … they get to have food and drink, garlands and various adornments.

<!-- @segment an10.177:12.1 -->

Take someone else who kills living creatures … and has wrong view.

<!-- @segment an10.177:12.2 -->

They give to ascetics or brahmins …

<!-- @segment an10.177:12.3 -->

When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of horses. …

<!-- @segment an10.177:12.4 -->

cattle …

<!-- @segment an10.177:12.5 -->

dogs.

<!-- @segment an10.177:12.6 -->

There they get to have food and drink, garlands and various adornments.

<!-- @segment an10.177:13.1 -->

Since in this life they killed living creatures … and had wrong view, they were reborn in the company of dogs.

<!-- @segment an10.177:13.2 -->

Since they gave to ascetics or brahmins … they get to have food and drink, garlands and various adornments.

<!-- @segment an10.177:14.1 -->

Take someone else who doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They don’t use speech that’s false, backbiting, harsh, or nonsensical. And they’re contented, kind-hearted, with right view.

<!-- @segment an10.177:14.2 -->

They give to ascetics or brahmins …

<!-- @segment an10.177:14.3 -->

When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the human realm.

<!-- @segment an10.177:14.4 -->

There they get to have the five kinds of human sensual stimulation.

<!-- @segment an10.177:15.1 -->

Since in this life they didn’t kill living creatures … and had right view, they were reborn in the company of humans.

<!-- @segment an10.177:15.2 -->

Since they gave to ascetics or brahmins … they get to have the five kinds of human sensual stimulation.

<!-- @segment an10.177:16.1 -->

Take someone else who doesn’t kill living creatures … and has right view.

<!-- @segment an10.177:16.2 -->

They give to ascetics or brahmins …

<!-- @segment an10.177:16.3 -->

When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of the gods.

<!-- @segment an10.177:16.4 -->

There they get to have the five kinds of heavenly sensual stimulation.

<!-- @segment an10.177:17.1 -->

Since in this life they didn’t kill living creatures … and had right view, they were reborn in the company of the gods.

<!-- @segment an10.177:17.2 -->

Since they gave to ascetics or brahmins … they get to have the five kinds of heavenly sensual stimulation.

<!-- @segment an10.177:17.3 -->

It’s never fruitless for the donor.”

<!-- @segment an10.177:18.1 -->

“It’s incredible, worthy Gotama, it’s amazing,

<!-- @segment an10.177:18.2 -->

This is quite enough to justify giving gifts and performing memorial rites for the dead, since it’s never fruitless for the donor.”

<!-- @segment an10.177:18.3 -->

“That’s so true, brahmin. It’s never fruitless for the donor.”

<!-- @segment an10.177:19.1 -->

“Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! …

<!-- @segment an10.177:19.2 -->

From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”

<!-- @segment an10.177:19.3 -->
