---
slug: an10.108
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Doctors
description: The Buddha teaches on doctors, presenting a tenfold teaching for disciples on the path.
qualities: liberation, suffering, mindfulness, right view, lamentation, sorrow
theme: urgency, training guideline
---

<!-- @segment an10.108:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, doctors prescribe a purgative for eliminating illnesses stemming from disorders of bile, phlegm, and wind.

<!-- @segment an10.108:1.2 -->

There is such a purgative, I don’t deny it.

<!-- @segment an10.108:1.3 -->

But this kind of purgative sometimes works and sometimes fails.

<!-- @segment an10.108:2.1 -->

I will teach a noble purgative that works without fail. Relying on that purgative, sentient beings who are liable to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are freed from all these things.

<!-- @segment an10.108:2.2 -->

Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment an10.108:2.3 -->

“Yes, sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment an10.108:2.4 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment an10.108:3.1 -->

“And what is the noble purgative that works without fail?

<!-- @segment an10.108:4.1 -->

For one of right view, wrong view is purged.

<!-- @segment an10.108:4.2 -->

And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong view are purged.

<!-- @segment an10.108:4.3 -->

And because of right view, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

<!-- @segment an10.108:5.1 -->

For one of right purpose, wrong purpose is purged. …

<!-- @segment an10.108:5.2 -->

For one of right speech, wrong speech is purged. …

<!-- @segment an10.108:5.3 -->

For one of right action, wrong action is purged. …

<!-- @segment an10.108:5.4 -->

For one of right livelihood, wrong livelihood is purged. …

<!-- @segment an10.108:5.5 -->

For one of right effort, wrong effort is purged.

<!-- @segment an10.108:5.6 -->

For one of right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is purged. …

<!-- @segment an10.108:5.7 -->

For one of right immersion, wrong immersion is purged. …

<!-- @segment an10.108:5.8 -->

For one of right knowledge, wrong knowledge is purged. …

<!-- @segment an10.108:6.1 -->

For one of right freedom, wrong freedom is purged.

<!-- @segment an10.108:6.2 -->

And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong freedom are purged.

<!-- @segment an10.108:6.3 -->

And because of right freedom, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

<!-- @segment an10.108:6.4 -->

This is the noble purgative that works without fail. Relying on this purgative, sentient beings who are liable to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are freed from all these things.”
