---
slug: an10.115
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Bad Principles (3rd)
---

<!-- @segment an10.115:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, you should know bad principles and good principles.

<!-- @segment an10.115:1.2 -->

And you should know bad results and good results.

<!-- @segment an10.115:1.3 -->

Knowing these things, your practice should follow the good principles with good results.”

<!-- @segment an10.115:1.4 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment an10.115:1.5 -->

When he had spoken, the Holy One rose from his seat and entered his dwelling.

<!-- @segment an10.115:2.1 -->

Soon after the Buddha left, those mendicants considered,

<!-- @segment an10.115:2.2 -->

“The Buddha gave this brief summary recital, then entered his dwelling without explaining the meaning in detail.

<!-- @segment an10.115:2.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:2.4 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:2.5 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:2.6 -->

Who can explain in detail the meaning of this brief summary recital given by the Buddha?”

<!-- @segment an10.115:3.1 -->

Then they considered,

<!-- @segment an10.115:3.2 -->

“This Venerable Ānanda is praised by the Buddha and esteemed by his sensible spiritual companions.

<!-- @segment an10.115:3.3 -->

He is capable of explaining in detail the meaning of this brief summary recital given by the Buddha.

<!-- @segment an10.115:3.4 -->

Let’s go to him, and ask him about this matter.

<!-- @segment an10.115:3.5 -->

As he answers, so we’ll remember it.”

<!-- @segment an10.115:4.1 -->

Then those mendicants went to Ānanda, and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment an10.115:4.2 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side. They told him what had happened, and said,

<!-- @segment an10.115:5.1 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:5.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:5.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:6.1 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:6.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:6.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:6.4 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:6.5 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:7.1 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:7.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:7.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:7.4 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:7.5 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:7.6 -->

“May Venerable Ānanda please explain this.”

<!-- @segment an10.115:8.1 -->

“Reverends, suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. And while wandering in search of heartwood he’d come across a large tree standing with heartwood. But he’d pass over the roots and trunk, imagining that the heartwood should be sought in the branches and leaves.

<!-- @segment an10.115:8.2 -->

Such is the consequence for the venerables. Though you were face to face with the Buddha, you bypassed him, imagining that you should ask me about this matter.

<!-- @segment an10.115:8.3 -->

For he is the Buddha, the one who knows and sees. He is vision, he is knowledge, he is the manifestation of principle, he is the manifestation of divinity. He is the teacher, the proclaimer, the elucidator of meaning, the bestower of freedom from death, the lord of truth, the Realized One.

<!-- @segment an10.115:8.4 -->

That was the time to approach the Buddha and ask about this matter.

<!-- @segment an10.115:8.5 -->

You should have remembered it in line with the Buddha’s answer.”

<!-- @segment an10.115:9.1 -->

“Certainly he is the Buddha, the one who knows and sees. He is vision, he is knowledge, he is the manifestation of principle, he is the manifestation of divinity. He is the teacher, the proclaimer, the elucidator of meaning, the bestower of freedom from death, the lord of truth, the Realized One.

<!-- @segment an10.115:9.2 -->

That was the time to approach the Buddha and ask about this matter.

<!-- @segment an10.115:9.3 -->

We should have remembered it in line with the Buddha’s answer.

<!-- @segment an10.115:9.4 -->

Still, Venerable Ānanda is praised by the Buddha and esteemed by his sensible spiritual companions.

<!-- @segment an10.115:9.5 -->

You are capable of explaining in detail the meaning of this brief summary recital given by the Buddha.

<!-- @segment an10.115:9.6 -->

Please explain this, if it’s no trouble.”

<!-- @segment an10.115:10.1 -->

“Then listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment an10.115:10.2 -->

“Yes, reverend,” they replied.

<!-- @segment an10.115:10.3 -->

Ānanda said this:

<!-- @segment an10.115:11.1 -->

“Reverends, the Buddha gave this brief summary recital, then entered his dwelling without explaining the meaning in detail:

<!-- @segment an10.115:11.2 -->

‘You should know bad principles and good principles.

<!-- @segment an10.115:11.3 -->

And you should know bad results and good results.

<!-- @segment an10.115:11.4 -->

Knowing these things, your practice should follow the good principles with good results.’

<!-- @segment an10.115:12.1 -->

So what are bad principles? What are good principles? What are bad results? And what are good results?

<!-- @segment an10.115:13.1 -->

Wrong view is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.115:13.2 -->

Right view is a good principle.

<!-- @segment an10.115:13.3 -->

And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong view are bad results.

<!-- @segment an10.115:13.4 -->

And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right view are good results.

<!-- @segment an10.115:14.1 -->

Wrong purpose is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.115:14.2 -->

Right purpose is a good principle. …

<!-- @segment an10.115:14.3 -->

Wrong speech is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.115:14.4 -->

Right speech is a good principle. …

<!-- @segment an10.115:14.5 -->

Wrong action is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.115:14.6 -->

Right action is a good principle. …

<!-- @segment an10.115:14.7 -->

Wrong livelihood is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.115:14.8 -->

Right livelihood is a good principle. …

<!-- @segment an10.115:14.9 -->

Wrong effort is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.115:14.10 -->

Right effort is a good principle. …

<!-- @segment an10.115:14.11 -->

Wrong mindfulness is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.115:14.12 -->

Right mindfulness is a good principle. …

<!-- @segment an10.115:14.13 -->

Wrong immersion is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.115:14.14 -->

Right immersion is a good principle. …

<!-- @segment an10.115:14.15 -->

Wrong knowledge is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.115:14.16 -->

Right knowledge is a good principle. …

<!-- @segment an10.115:15.1 -->

Wrong freedom is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.115:15.2 -->

Right freedom is a good principle.

<!-- @segment an10.115:15.3 -->

And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong freedom are bad results.

<!-- @segment an10.115:15.4 -->

And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right freedom are good results.

<!-- @segment an10.115:16.1 -->

The Buddha gave this brief summary recital, then entered his dwelling without explaining the meaning in detail:

<!-- @segment an10.115:16.2 -->

‘You should know bad principles and good principles …

<!-- @segment an10.115:16.3 -->

and practice accordingly.’ And this is how I understand the detailed meaning of this summary recital.

<!-- @segment an10.115:16.4 -->

If you wish, you may go to the Buddha and ask him about this.

<!-- @segment an10.115:16.5 -->

You should remember it in line with the Buddha’s answer.”

<!-- @segment an10.115:17.1 -->

“Yes, reverend,” said those mendicants, approving and agreeing with what Ānanda said. Then they rose from their seats and went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. Then they said:

<!-- @segment an10.115:18.1 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:18.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:18.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:19.1 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:19.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:19.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:19.4 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:19.5 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:20.1 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:20.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:20.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:20.4 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:20.5 -->



<!-- @segment an10.115:21.1 -->

“Sir, we went to Ānanda and asked him about this matter.

<!-- @segment an10.115:21.2 -->

And Ānanda clearly explained the meaning to us in this manner, with these words and phrases.”

<!-- @segment an10.115:22.1 -->

“Good, good, mendicants!

<!-- @segment an10.115:22.2 -->

Ānanda is astute,

<!-- @segment an10.115:22.3 -->

he has great wisdom.

<!-- @segment an10.115:22.4 -->

If you came to me and asked this question, I would answer it in exactly the same way as Ānanda.

<!-- @segment an10.115:22.5 -->

That is what it means, and that’s how you should remember it.”
