---
slug: an10.172
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Bad Principles (2nd)
---

<!-- @segment an10.172:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, you should know bad principles and good principles.

<!-- @segment an10.172:1.2 -->

And you should know bad results and good results.

<!-- @segment an10.172:1.3 -->

Knowing these things, your practice should follow the good principles with good results.”

<!-- @segment an10.172:1.4 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment an10.172:1.5 -->

When he had spoken, the Holy One rose from his seat and entered his dwelling.

<!-- @segment an10.172:2.1 -->

Soon after the Buddha left, those mendicants considered,

<!-- @segment an10.172:2.2 -->

“The Buddha gave this brief summary recital, then entered his dwelling without explaining the meaning in detail.

<!-- @segment an10.172:2.3 -->

‘You should know bad principles and good principles.

<!-- @segment an10.172:2.4 -->

And you should know bad results and good results.

<!-- @segment an10.172:2.5 -->

Knowing these things, your practice should follow the good principles with good results.’

<!-- @segment an10.172:2.6 -->

Who can explain in detail the meaning of this brief summary recital given by the Buddha?”

<!-- @segment an10.172:3.1 -->

Then those mendicants thought,

<!-- @segment an10.172:3.2 -->

“This Venerable Mahākaccāna is praised by the Buddha and esteemed by his sensible spiritual companions.

<!-- @segment an10.172:3.3 -->

He is capable of explaining in detail the meaning of this brief summary recital given by the Buddha.

<!-- @segment an10.172:3.4 -->

Let’s go to him, and ask him about this matter.

<!-- @segment an10.172:3.5 -->

As he answers, so we’ll remember it.”

<!-- @segment an10.172:4.1 -->

Then those mendicants went to Mahākaccāna, and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment an10.172:4.2 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side. They told him what had happened, and said,

<!-- @segment an10.172:5.1 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:5.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:5.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:5.4 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:6.1 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:6.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:6.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:6.4 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:6.5 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:7.1 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:7.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:7.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:7.4 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:7.5 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:7.6 -->

“May Venerable Mahākaccāna please explain this.”

<!-- @segment an10.172:8.1 -->

“Reverends, suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. And while wandering in search of heartwood he’d come across a large tree standing with heartwood. But he’d pass over the roots and trunk, imagining that the heartwood should be sought in the branches and leaves.

<!-- @segment an10.172:8.2 -->

Such is the consequence for the venerables. Though you were face to face with the Buddha, you bypassed him, imagining that you should ask me about this matter.

<!-- @segment an10.172:8.3 -->

For he is the Buddha, the one who knows and sees. He is vision, he is knowledge, he is the manifestation of principle, he is the manifestation of divinity. He is the teacher, the proclaimer, the elucidator of meaning, the bestower of freedom from death, the lord of truth, the Realized One.

<!-- @segment an10.172:8.4 -->

That was the time to approach the Buddha and ask about this matter.

<!-- @segment an10.172:8.5 -->

You should have remembered it in line with the Buddha’s answer.”

<!-- @segment an10.172:9.1 -->

“Certainly he is the Buddha, the one who knows and sees. He is vision, he is knowledge, he is the manifestation of principle, he is the manifestation of divinity. He is the teacher, the proclaimer, the elucidator of meaning, the bestower of freedom from death, the lord of truth, the Realized One.

<!-- @segment an10.172:9.2 -->

That was the time to approach the Buddha and ask about this matter.

<!-- @segment an10.172:9.3 -->

We should have remembered it in line with the Buddha’s answer.

<!-- @segment an10.172:9.4 -->

Still, Venerable Mahākaccāna is praised by the Buddha and esteemed by his sensible spiritual companions.

<!-- @segment an10.172:9.5 -->

He is capable of explaining in detail the meaning of this brief summary recital given by the Buddha.

<!-- @segment an10.172:9.6 -->

Please explain this, if it’s no trouble.”

<!-- @segment an10.172:10.1 -->

“Well then, reverends, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment an10.172:10.2 -->

“Yes, reverend,” they replied.

<!-- @segment an10.172:10.3 -->

Mahākaccāna said this:

<!-- @segment an10.172:11.1 -->

“Reverends, the Buddha gave this brief summary recital, then entered his dwelling without explaining the meaning in detail:

<!-- @segment an10.172:11.2 -->

‘You should know bad principles and good principles …

<!-- @segment an10.172:11.3 -->

and practice accordingly.’

<!-- @segment an10.172:12.1 -->

So what are bad principles? What are good principles?

<!-- @segment an10.172:12.2 -->

What are bad results? And what are good results?

<!-- @segment an10.172:12.3 -->

Killing living creatures is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.172:12.4 -->

Not killing living creatures is a good principle.

<!-- @segment an10.172:12.5 -->

And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by killing living creatures are bad results.

<!-- @segment an10.172:12.6 -->

And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of not killing living creatures are good results.

<!-- @segment an10.172:13.1 -->

Stealing is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.172:13.2 -->

Not stealing is a good principle.

<!-- @segment an10.172:13.3 -->

And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by stealing are bad results.

<!-- @segment an10.172:13.4 -->

And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of not stealing are good results.

<!-- @segment an10.172:14.1 -->

Sexual misconduct is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.172:14.2 -->

Avoiding sexual misconduct is a good principle.

<!-- @segment an10.172:14.3 -->

And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by sexual misconduct are bad results.

<!-- @segment an10.172:14.4 -->

And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of avoiding sexual misconduct are good results.

<!-- @segment an10.172:15.1 -->

Lying is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.172:15.2 -->

Not lying is a good principle.

<!-- @segment an10.172:15.3 -->

And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by lying are bad results.

<!-- @segment an10.172:15.4 -->

And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of not lying are good results.

<!-- @segment an10.172:16.1 -->

Backbiting is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.172:16.2 -->

Avoiding backbiting is a good principle.

<!-- @segment an10.172:16.3 -->

And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by backbiting are bad results.

<!-- @segment an10.172:16.4 -->

And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of avoiding backbiting are good results.

<!-- @segment an10.172:17.1 -->

Harsh speech is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.172:17.2 -->

Avoiding harsh speech is a good principle.

<!-- @segment an10.172:17.3 -->

And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by harsh speech are bad results.

<!-- @segment an10.172:17.4 -->

And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of avoiding harsh speech are good results.

<!-- @segment an10.172:18.1 -->

Talking nonsense is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.172:18.2 -->

Avoiding talking nonsense is a good principle.

<!-- @segment an10.172:18.3 -->

And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by talking nonsense are bad results.

<!-- @segment an10.172:18.4 -->

And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of avoiding talking nonsense are good results.

<!-- @segment an10.172:19.1 -->

Covetousness is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.172:19.2 -->

Contentment is a good principle.

<!-- @segment an10.172:19.3 -->

And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by covetousness are bad results.

<!-- @segment an10.172:19.4 -->

And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of contentment are good results.

<!-- @segment an10.172:20.1 -->

Ill will is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.172:20.2 -->

Good will is a good principle.

<!-- @segment an10.172:20.3 -->

And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by ill will are bad results.

<!-- @segment an10.172:20.4 -->

And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of good will are good results.

<!-- @segment an10.172:21.1 -->

Wrong view is a bad principle.

<!-- @segment an10.172:21.2 -->

Right view is a good principle.

<!-- @segment an10.172:21.3 -->

And the many bad, unskillful qualities produced by wrong view are bad results.

<!-- @segment an10.172:21.4 -->

And the many skillful qualities fully developed because of right view are good results.

<!-- @segment an10.172:22.1 -->

The Buddha gave this brief summary recital, then entered his dwelling without explaining the meaning in detail:

<!-- @segment an10.172:22.2 -->

‘You should know bad principles and good principles …

<!-- @segment an10.172:22.3 -->

and practice accordingly.’

<!-- @segment an10.172:22.4 -->

And this is how I understand the detailed meaning of this summary recital.

<!-- @segment an10.172:22.5 -->

If you wish, you may go to the Buddha and ask him about this.

<!-- @segment an10.172:22.6 -->

You should remember it in line with the Buddha’s answer.”

<!-- @segment an10.172:23.1 -->

“Yes, reverend,” said those mendicants, approving and agreeing with what Mahākaccāna said. Then they rose from their seats and went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. Then they said:

<!-- @segment an10.172:24.1 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:24.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:24.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:25.1 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:25.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:25.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:25.4 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:25.5 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:26.1 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:26.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:26.3 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:26.4 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:26.5 -->



<!-- @segment an10.172:27.1 -->

“Sir, we went to Mahākaccāna and asked him about this matter.

<!-- @segment an10.172:27.2 -->

And Mahākaccāna clearly explained the meaning to us in this manner, with these words and phrases.”

<!-- @segment an10.172:28.1 -->

“Good, good, mendicants!

<!-- @segment an10.172:28.2 -->

Mahākaccāna is astute, he has great wisdom.

<!-- @segment an10.172:28.3 -->

If you came to me and asked this question, I would answer it in exactly the same way as Mahākaccāna.

<!-- @segment an10.172:28.4 -->

That is what it means, and that’s how you should remember it.”
