---
slug: an10.119
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Ceremony of Descent (1st)
description: The Buddha teaches on the ceremony of descent (1st), presenting a tenfold teaching for disciples on the path.
qualities: harm, mindfulness, wrong effort, wrong livelihood, wrong mindfulness, wrong speech
theme: story, training guideline
---

<!-- @segment an10.119:1.1 -->

Now, at that time it was the sabbath. The brahmin Jānussoṇi had bathed his head and dressed in a new pair of linen robes. Holding a handful of fresh grass, he stood to one side not far from the Buddha.

<!-- @segment an10.119:2.1 -->

The Buddha saw him,

<!-- @segment an10.119:2.2 -->

and said,

<!-- @segment an10.119:2.3 -->

“Brahmin, why have you bathed your head and dressed in a new pair of linen robes? Why are you standing to one side holding a handful of fresh grass?

<!-- @segment an10.119:2.4 -->

What’s going on today with the brahmin clan?”

<!-- @segment an10.119:2.5 -->

“Worthy Gotama, today is the ceremony of descent for the brahmin clan.”

<!-- @segment an10.119:3.1 -->

“But how do the brahmins observe the ceremony of descent?”

<!-- @segment an10.119:3.2 -->

“Well, worthy Gotama, on the sabbath the brahmins bathe their heads and dress in a new pair of linen robes. They make a heap of fresh cow dung and spread it with green grass. Then they make their beds between the boundary and the fire chamber.

<!-- @segment an10.119:3.3 -->

That night they rise three times and worship the fire with cupped palms:

<!-- @segment an10.119:3.4 -->

‘We descend, lord! We descend, lord!’

<!-- @segment an10.119:3.5 -->

And they serve the fire with abundant ghee, oil, and butter.

<!-- @segment an10.119:3.6 -->

And when the night has passed they serve the brahmins with delicious fresh and cooked foods.

<!-- @segment an10.119:3.7 -->

That’s how the brahmins observe the ceremony of descent.”

<!-- @segment an10.119:4.1 -->

“The ceremony of descent observed by the brahmins is quite different from that observed in the training of the Noble One.”

<!-- @segment an10.119:4.2 -->

“But worthy Gotama, how is the ceremony of descent observed in the training of the Noble One?

<!-- @segment an10.119:4.3 -->

Worthy Gotama, please teach me this.”

<!-- @segment an10.119:5.1 -->

“Well then, brahmin, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment an10.119:5.2 -->

“Yes, worthy sir,” Jānussoṇi replied.

<!-- @segment an10.119:5.3 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment an10.119:6.1 -->

“It’s when a noble disciple reflects:

<!-- @segment an10.119:6.2 -->

‘Wrong view has a bad result

<!-- @segment an10.119:6.3 -->

in both this life and the next.’

<!-- @segment an10.119:6.4 -->

Reflecting like this, they give up wrong view,

<!-- @segment an10.119:6.5 -->

they descend from wrong view.

<!-- @segment an10.119:7.1 -->

‘Wrong purpose has a bad result

<!-- @segment an10.119:7.2 -->

in both this life and the next.’

<!-- @segment an10.119:7.3 -->

Reflecting like this, they give up wrong purpose,

<!-- @segment an10.119:7.4 -->

they descend from wrong purpose.

<!-- @segment an10.119:8.1 -->

‘Wrong speech has a bad result

<!-- @segment an10.119:8.2 -->

in both this life and the next.’

<!-- @segment an10.119:8.3 -->

Reflecting like this, they give up wrong speech,

<!-- @segment an10.119:8.4 -->

they descend from wrong speech.

<!-- @segment an10.119:9.1 -->

‘Wrong action has a bad result

<!-- @segment an10.119:9.2 -->

in both this life and the next.’

<!-- @segment an10.119:9.3 -->

Reflecting like this, they give up wrong action,

<!-- @segment an10.119:9.4 -->

they descend from wrong action.

<!-- @segment an10.119:10.1 -->

‘Wrong livelihood has a bad result

<!-- @segment an10.119:10.2 -->

in both this life and the next.’

<!-- @segment an10.119:10.3 -->

Reflecting like this, they give up wrong livelihood,

<!-- @segment an10.119:10.4 -->

they descend from wrong livelihood.

<!-- @segment an10.119:11.1 -->

‘Wrong effort has a bad result

<!-- @segment an10.119:11.2 -->

in both this life and the next.’

<!-- @segment an10.119:11.3 -->

Reflecting like this, they give up wrong effort,

<!-- @segment an10.119:11.4 -->

they descend from wrong effort.

<!-- @segment an10.119:12.1 -->

‘Wrong mindfulness has a bad result

<!-- @segment an10.119:12.2 -->

in both this life and the next.’

<!-- @segment an10.119:12.3 -->

Reflecting like this, they give up wrong mindfulness,

<!-- @segment an10.119:12.4 -->

they descend from wrong mindfulness.

<!-- @segment an10.119:13.1 -->

‘Wrong immersion has a bad result

<!-- @segment an10.119:13.2 -->

in both this life and the next.’

<!-- @segment an10.119:13.3 -->

Reflecting like this, they give up wrong immersion,

<!-- @segment an10.119:13.4 -->

they descend from wrong immersion.

<!-- @segment an10.119:14.1 -->

‘Wrong knowledge has a bad result

<!-- @segment an10.119:14.2 -->

in both this life and the next.’

<!-- @segment an10.119:14.3 -->

Reflecting like this, they give up wrong knowledge,

<!-- @segment an10.119:14.4 -->

they descend from wrong knowledge.

<!-- @segment an10.119:15.1 -->

‘Wrong freedom has a bad result

<!-- @segment an10.119:15.2 -->

in both this life and the next.’

<!-- @segment an10.119:15.3 -->

Reflecting like this, they give up wrong freedom,

<!-- @segment an10.119:15.4 -->

they descend from wrong freedom.

<!-- @segment an10.119:15.5 -->

This is the ceremony of descent in the training of the Noble One.”

<!-- @segment an10.119:16.1 -->

“The ceremony of descent observed by the brahmins is quite different from that observed in the training of the Noble One.

<!-- @segment an10.119:16.2 -->

And, worthy Gotama, the ceremony of descent observed by the brahmins is not worth a sixteenth part of a master of the ceremony of descent observed in the training of the Noble One.

<!-- @segment an10.119:16.3 -->

Excellent, worthy Gotama! …

<!-- @segment an10.119:16.4 -->

From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”
