---
slug: an10.73
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Likable
---

<!-- @segment an10.73:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, these ten likable, desirable, and agreeable things are rare in the world.

<!-- @segment an10.73:1.2 -->

What ten?

<!-- @segment an10.73:1.3 -->

Wealth,

<!-- @segment an10.73:1.4 -->

beauty,

<!-- @segment an10.73:1.5 -->

health,

<!-- @segment an10.73:1.6 -->

ethical conduct,

<!-- @segment an10.73:1.7 -->

the spiritual life,

<!-- @segment an10.73:1.8 -->

friends,

<!-- @segment an10.73:1.9 -->

learning,

<!-- @segment an10.73:1.10 -->

wisdom,

<!-- @segment an10.73:1.11 -->

good qualities,

<!-- @segment an10.73:1.12 -->

and heaven are likable, desirable, and agreeable things that are rare in the world.

<!-- @segment an10.73:2.1 -->

Ten things are roadblocks for these ten likable, desirable, and agreeable things that are rare in the world.

<!-- @segment an10.73:2.2 -->

Sloth and lack of initiative are a roadblock for wealth. Lack of adornment and decoration are a roadblock for beauty. Unsuitable activity is a roadblock for health. Bad friendship is a roadblock for ethical conduct. Lack of sense restraint is a roadblock for the spiritual life. Dishonesty is a roadblock for friends. Not rehearsing is a roadblock for learning. Not wanting to listen and ask questions are roadblocks for wisdom. Lack of commitment and reviewing are roadblocks for good qualities. Wrong practice hinders heaven.

<!-- @segment an10.73:2.3 -->

These ten things are roadblocks for these ten likable, desirable, and agreeable things that are rare in the world.

<!-- @segment an10.73:3.1 -->

Ten things nourish these ten likable, desirable, and agreeable things that are rare in the world.

<!-- @segment an10.73:3.2 -->

Application and initiative nourish wealth. Adornment and decoration nourish beauty. Suitable activity nourishes health. Good friendship nourishes ethical conduct. Sense restraint nourishes the spiritual life. Honesty nourishes friends. Rehearsing nourishes learning. Eagerness to listen and ask questions nourishes wisdom. Commitment and reviewing nourish good qualities. Right practice nourishes heaven.

<!-- @segment an10.73:3.3 -->

These ten things nourish these ten likable, desirable, and agreeable things that are rare in the world.”
