---
slug: an10.23
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Body
---

<!-- @segment an10.23:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, there are things that should be given up by the body, not by speech.

<!-- @segment an10.23:1.2 -->

There are things that should be given up by speech, not by the body.

<!-- @segment an10.23:1.3 -->

There are things that should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom.

<!-- @segment an10.23:2.1 -->

And what are the things that should be given up by the body, not by speech?

<!-- @segment an10.23:2.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant has committed a certain unskillful offense by way of body.

<!-- @segment an10.23:2.3 -->

After examination, sensible spiritual companions say this to them:

<!-- @segment an10.23:2.4 -->

‘Venerable, you’ve committed a certain unskillful offense by way of body.

<!-- @segment an10.23:2.5 -->

Please give up that bad bodily conduct and develop good bodily conduct.’

<!-- @segment an10.23:2.6 -->

When spoken to by their sensible spiritual companions they give up that bad bodily conduct and develop good bodily conduct.

<!-- @segment an10.23:2.7 -->

These are the things that should be given up by the body, not by speech.

<!-- @segment an10.23:3.1 -->

And what are the things that should be given up by speech, not by the body?

<!-- @segment an10.23:3.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant has committed a certain unskillful offense by way of speech.

<!-- @segment an10.23:3.3 -->

After examination, sensible spiritual companions say this to them:

<!-- @segment an10.23:3.4 -->

‘Venerable, you’ve committed a certain unskillful offense by way of speech.

<!-- @segment an10.23:3.5 -->

Please give up that bad verbal conduct and develop good verbal conduct.’

<!-- @segment an10.23:3.6 -->

When spoken to by their sensible spiritual companions they give up that bad verbal conduct and develop good verbal conduct.

<!-- @segment an10.23:3.7 -->

These are the things that should be given up by speech, not by the body.

<!-- @segment an10.23:4.1 -->

And what are the things that should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom?

<!-- @segment an10.23:4.2 -->

Greed …

<!-- @segment an10.23:4.3 -->

hate …

<!-- @segment an10.23:4.4 -->

delusion …

<!-- @segment an10.23:4.5 -->

anger …

<!-- @segment an10.23:4.6 -->

acrimony …

<!-- @segment an10.23:4.7 -->

disdain …

<!-- @segment an10.23:4.8 -->

contempt …

<!-- @segment an10.23:4.9 -->

and stinginess are things that should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom.

<!-- @segment an10.23:5.1 -->

Nasty jealousy should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom.

<!-- @segment an10.23:5.2 -->

And what is nasty jealousy?

<!-- @segment an10.23:5.3 -->

It’s when a householder or their child is prospering in money, grain, silver, or gold.

<!-- @segment an10.23:5.4 -->

And a bondservant or dependent thinks:

<!-- @segment an10.23:5.5 -->

‘Oh, may that householder or their child not prosper in money, grain, silver, or gold!’

<!-- @segment an10.23:5.6 -->

Or an ascetic or brahmin receives robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.

<!-- @segment an10.23:5.7 -->

And some other ascetic or brahmin thinks:

<!-- @segment an10.23:5.8 -->

‘Oh, may that venerable not receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.’

<!-- @segment an10.23:5.9 -->

This is called nasty jealousy.

<!-- @segment an10.23:6.1 -->

Corrupt wishes should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom.

<!-- @segment an10.23:6.2 -->

And what are corrupt wishes?

<!-- @segment an10.23:6.3 -->

It’s when a faithless person wishes to be known as faithful.

<!-- @segment an10.23:6.4 -->

An unethical person wishes to be known as ethical.

<!-- @segment an10.23:6.5 -->

An unlearned person wishes to be known as learned.

<!-- @segment an10.23:6.6 -->

A lover of company wishes to be known as secluded.

<!-- @segment an10.23:6.7 -->

A lazy person wishes to be known as energetic.

<!-- @segment an10.23:6.8 -->

An unmindful person wishes to be known as mindful.

<!-- @segment an10.23:6.9 -->

A person without immersion wishes to be known as having immersion.

<!-- @segment an10.23:6.10 -->

A witless person wishes to be known as wise.

<!-- @segment an10.23:6.11 -->

Someone who has not ended the defilements wishes to be known as having ended the defilements.

<!-- @segment an10.23:6.12 -->

These are called corrupt wishes.

<!-- @segment an10.23:6.13 -->

Corrupt wishes should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom.

<!-- @segment an10.23:7.1 -->

Suppose that greed masters that mendicant and keeps going.

<!-- @segment an10.23:7.2 -->

Or that hate …

<!-- @segment an10.23:7.3 -->

delusion …

<!-- @segment an10.23:7.4 -->

anger …

<!-- @segment an10.23:7.5 -->

acrimony …

<!-- @segment an10.23:7.6 -->

disdain …

<!-- @segment an10.23:7.7 -->

contempt …

<!-- @segment an10.23:7.8 -->

stinginess …

<!-- @segment an10.23:7.9 -->

nasty jealousy …

<!-- @segment an10.23:7.10 -->

or corrupt wishes master them and keep going.

<!-- @segment an10.23:7.11 -->

You should know of them:

<!-- @segment an10.23:7.12 -->

‘This venerable does not have the understanding that would eliminate greed, so greed masters them and keeps going.

<!-- @segment an10.23:7.13 -->

They don’t have the understanding that would eliminate hate …

<!-- @segment an10.23:7.14 -->

delusion …

<!-- @segment an10.23:7.15 -->

anger …

<!-- @segment an10.23:7.16 -->

acrimony …

<!-- @segment an10.23:7.17 -->

disdain …

<!-- @segment an10.23:7.18 -->

contempt …

<!-- @segment an10.23:7.19 -->

stinginess …

<!-- @segment an10.23:7.20 -->

nasty jealousy …

<!-- @segment an10.23:7.21 -->

or corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes master them and keep going.’

<!-- @segment an10.23:8.1 -->

Suppose that greed does not master that mendicant and keep going.

<!-- @segment an10.23:8.2 -->

Or that hate …

<!-- @segment an10.23:8.3 -->

delusion …

<!-- @segment an10.23:8.4 -->

anger …

<!-- @segment an10.23:8.5 -->

acrimony …

<!-- @segment an10.23:8.6 -->

disdain …

<!-- @segment an10.23:8.7 -->

contempt …

<!-- @segment an10.23:8.8 -->

stinginess …

<!-- @segment an10.23:8.9 -->

nasty jealousy …

<!-- @segment an10.23:8.10 -->

or corrupt wishes don’t master that mendicant and keep going.

<!-- @segment an10.23:8.11 -->

You should know of them:

<!-- @segment an10.23:8.12 -->

‘This venerable has the understanding that eliminates greed, so greed doesn’t master them and keep going.

<!-- @segment an10.23:8.13 -->

They have the understanding that eliminates hate …

<!-- @segment an10.23:8.14 -->

delusion …

<!-- @segment an10.23:8.15 -->

anger …

<!-- @segment an10.23:8.16 -->

acrimony …

<!-- @segment an10.23:8.17 -->

disdain …

<!-- @segment an10.23:8.18 -->

contempt …

<!-- @segment an10.23:8.19 -->

stinginess …

<!-- @segment an10.23:8.20 -->

nasty jealousy …

<!-- @segment an10.23:8.21 -->

and corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes don’t master them and keep going.’”
