---
slug: an10.2
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Making a Wish
---

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethical conduct, need not make a wish:

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.2 -->

‘May I have no regrets!’

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.3 -->

It’s only natural that an ethical person has no regrets.

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.4 -->

When you have no regrets you need not make a wish:

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.5 -->

‘May I feel joy!’

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.6 -->

It’s only natural that joy springs up when you have no regrets.

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.7 -->

When you feel joy you need not make a wish:

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.8 -->

‘May I experience rapture!’

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.9 -->

It’s only natural that rapture arises when you’re joyful.

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.10 -->

When your mind is full of rapture you need not make a wish:

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.11 -->

‘May my body become tranquil!’

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.12 -->

It’s only natural that your body becomes tranquil when your mind is full of rapture.

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.13 -->

When your body is tranquil you need not make a wish:

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.14 -->

‘May I feel bliss!’

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.15 -->

It’s only natural to feel bliss when your body is tranquil.

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.16 -->

When you feel bliss you need not make a wish:

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.17 -->

‘May my mind be immersed in samādhi!’

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.18 -->

It’s only natural for the mind to be immersed in samādhi when you feel bliss.

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.19 -->

When your mind is immersed in samādhi you need not make a wish:

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.20 -->

‘May I truly know and see!’

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.21 -->

It’s only natural to truly know and see when your mind is immersed in samādhi.

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.22 -->

When you truly know and see you need not make a wish:

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.23 -->

‘May I become disillusioned and dispassionate!’

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.24 -->

It’s only natural to become disillusioned and dispassionate when you truly know and see.

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.25 -->

When you’re disillusioned and dispassionate you need not make a wish:

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.26 -->

‘May I realize the knowledge and vision of freedom!’

<!-- @segment an10.2:1.27 -->

It’s only natural to realize the knowledge and vision of freedom when you’re disillusioned and dispassionate.

<!-- @segment an10.2:2.1 -->

And so, mendicants, the knowledge and vision of freedom is the goal and benefit of disillusionment and dispassion.

<!-- @segment an10.2:2.2 -->

Disillusionment and dispassion is the goal and benefit of truly knowing and seeing.

<!-- @segment an10.2:2.3 -->

Truly knowing and seeing is the goal and benefit of immersion.

<!-- @segment an10.2:2.4 -->

Immersion is the goal and benefit of bliss.

<!-- @segment an10.2:2.5 -->

Bliss is the goal and benefit of tranquility.

<!-- @segment an10.2:2.6 -->

Tranquility is the goal and benefit of rapture.

<!-- @segment an10.2:2.7 -->

Rapture is the goal and benefit of joy.

<!-- @segment an10.2:2.8 -->

Joy is the goal and benefit of not having regrets.

<!-- @segment an10.2:2.9 -->

Not having regrets is the goal and benefit of skillful ethics.

<!-- @segment an10.2:2.10 -->

And so, mendicants, good qualities flow on and fill up from one to the other, for going from the near shore to the far shore.”
