---
slug: an10.26
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Kāḷī
description: The Buddha teaches on with kāḷī, presenting a tenfold teaching for disciples on the path.
qualities: vision, jhana, cultivation, respect
theme: directly knowing, training guideline
---

<!-- @segment an10.26:1.1 -->

At one time Venerable Mahākaccāna was staying in the land of the Avantis near Kuraraghara on Steep Mountain.

<!-- @segment an10.26:1.2 -->

Then the laywoman Kāḷī of Kurughara went up to Venerable Mahākaccāna, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment an10.26:1.3 -->

“Sir, this was said by the Buddha in ‘The Maidens’ Questions’:

<!-- @segment an10.26:2.1 -->

‘I’ve reached the goal, peace of heart.

<!-- @segment an10.26:2.2 -->

Having conquered the army <j>of the likable and pleasant,

<!-- @segment an10.26:2.3 -->

alone, practicing absorption, I awakened to bliss.

<!-- @segment an10.26:2.4 -->

That’s why I don’t get too close to people,

<!-- @segment an10.26:2.5 -->

and no-one gets too close to me.’

<!-- @segment an10.26:3.1 -->

How should we see the detailed meaning of the Buddha’s brief statement?”

<!-- @segment an10.26:4.1 -->

“Sister, some ascetics and brahmins regard the attainment of the meditation on universal earth to be the ultimate. Thinking ‘this is the goal’, they are reborn.

<!-- @segment an10.26:4.2 -->

The Buddha directly knew the extent to which the attainment of the meditation on universal earth was the ultimate.

<!-- @segment an10.26:4.3 -->

Directly knowing this he saw the beginning, the drawback, and the escape. And he saw the knowledge and vision of what is the path and what is not the path.

<!-- @segment an10.26:4.4 -->

Because he saw the beginning, the drawback, and the escape, and he saw the knowledge and vision of what is the path and what is not the path, he knew that he had reached the goal, peace of heart.

<!-- @segment an10.26:5.1 -->

Some ascetics and brahmins regard the attainment of the meditation on universal water to be the ultimate. Thinking ‘this is the goal’, they are reborn. …

<!-- @segment an10.26:5.2 -->

Some ascetics and brahmins regard the attainment of the meditation on universal fire …

<!-- @segment an10.26:5.3 -->

universal air …

<!-- @segment an10.26:5.4 -->

universal blue …

<!-- @segment an10.26:5.5 -->

universal yellow …

<!-- @segment an10.26:5.6 -->

universal red …

<!-- @segment an10.26:5.7 -->

universal white …

<!-- @segment an10.26:5.8 -->

universal space …

<!-- @segment an10.26:5.9 -->

universal consciousness to be the ultimate. Thinking ‘this is the goal’, they are reborn.

<!-- @segment an10.26:5.10 -->

The Buddha directly knew the extent to which the attainment of the meditation on universal consciousness was the ultimate.

<!-- @segment an10.26:5.11 -->

Directly knowing this he saw the beginning, the drawback, and the escape. And he saw the knowledge and vision of what is the path and what is not the path.

<!-- @segment an10.26:5.12 -->

Because he saw the beginning, the drawback, and the escape, and he saw the knowledge and vision of what is the path and what is not the path, he knew that he had reached the goal, peace of heart.

<!-- @segment an10.26:5.13 -->

So, sister, that’s how to understand the detailed meaning of what the Buddha said in brief in ‘The Maidens’ Questions’:

<!-- @segment an10.26:6.1 -->

‘I’ve reached the goal, peace of heart.

<!-- @segment an10.26:6.2 -->

Having conquered the army <j>of the likable and pleasant,

<!-- @segment an10.26:6.3 -->

alone, practicing absorption, I awakened to bliss.

<!-- @segment an10.26:6.4 -->

That’s why I don’t get too close to people,

<!-- @segment an10.26:6.5 -->

and no-one gets too close to me.’”

<!-- @segment an10.26:7.1 -->
