---
slug: an10.69
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Topics of Discussion (1st)
description: The Buddha teaches on topics of discussion (1st), presenting a tenfold teaching for disciples on the path.
qualities: contentment, vision, liberation, solitude, faith, wisdom
theme: story, training guideline
---

<!-- @segment an10.69:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment an10.69:1.2 -->

Now at that time, after the meal, on return from almsround, several mendicants sat together in the assembly hall. They engaged in all kinds of low talk, such as

<!-- @segment an10.69:1.3 -->

talk about kings, bandits, and ministers; talk about armies, threats, and wars; talk about food, drink, clothes, and beds; talk about garlands and fragrances; talk about family, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about women and heroes; street talk and well talk; talk about the departed; motley talk; tales of land and sea; and talk about being reborn in this or that place.

<!-- @segment an10.69:2.1 -->

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to the assembly hall, where he sat on the seat spread out

<!-- @segment an10.69:2.2 -->

and addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment an10.69:2.3 -->

“Mendicants, what were you sitting talking about just now? What conversation was left unfinished?”

<!-- @segment an10.69:3.1 -->

And they told him what had happened.

<!-- @segment an10.69:3.2 -->



<!-- @segment an10.69:3.3 -->

“Mendicants, it is not appropriate for you gentlemen who have gone forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness to engage in these kinds of low talk.

<!-- @segment an10.69:3.4 -->



<!-- @segment an10.69:4.1 -->

There are, mendicants, these ten topics of discussion.

<!-- @segment an10.69:4.2 -->

What ten?

<!-- @segment an10.69:4.3 -->

Talk about fewness of wishes, contentment, seclusion, aloofness, arousing energy, ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom.

<!-- @segment an10.69:4.4 -->

These are the ten topics of discussion.

<!-- @segment an10.69:5.1 -->

Mendicants, if you bring up these topics of conversation again and again then your glory could surpass even the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful, let alone the wanderers of other religions.”
