---
slug: an10.218
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Intentional (2nd)
description: The Buddha teaches on intentional (2nd), presenting a tenfold teaching for disciples on the path.
qualities: desire, suffering, wholesome, happiness, unwholesome, harm
theme: urgency, principle
---

<!-- @segment an10.218:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, I don’t say that intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated are eliminated without being experienced.

<!-- @segment an10.218:1.2 -->

And that may be in this very life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period.

<!-- @segment an10.218:1.3 -->

But in any case, there is no making an end of suffering without experiencing intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated, I say.

<!-- @segment an10.218:2.1 -->

Now, there are three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result.

<!-- @segment an10.218:2.2 -->

There are four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result.

<!-- @segment an10.218:2.3 -->

There are three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result.

<!-- @segment an10.218:3.1 -->

And what are the three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action? …

<!-- @segment an10.218:3.2 -->

These are the three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action.

<!-- @segment an10.218:4.1 -->

And what are the four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action? …

<!-- @segment an10.218:4.2 -->

These are the four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action.

<!-- @segment an10.218:5.1 -->

And what are the three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action? …

<!-- @segment an10.218:5.2 -->

These are the three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action.

<!-- @segment an10.218:6.1 -->

When their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell because of these three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action, these four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action, or these three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result.

<!-- @segment an10.218:7.1 -->

I don’t say that intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated are eliminated without being experienced.

<!-- @segment an10.218:7.2 -->

And that may be in this very life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period.

<!-- @segment an10.218:7.3 -->

But in any case, there is no making an end of suffering without experiencing intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated, I say.

<!-- @segment an10.218:8.1 -->

Now, there are three kinds of successful bodily action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result.

<!-- @segment an10.218:8.2 -->

There are four kinds of successful verbal action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result.

<!-- @segment an10.218:8.3 -->

There are three kinds of successful mental action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result.

<!-- @segment an10.218:9.1 -->

And what are the three kinds of successful bodily action? …

<!-- @segment an10.218:9.2 -->

These are the three kinds of successful bodily action.

<!-- @segment an10.218:10.1 -->

And what are the four kinds of successful verbal action? …

<!-- @segment an10.218:10.2 -->

These are the four kinds of successful verbal action.

<!-- @segment an10.218:11.1 -->

And what are the three kinds of successful mental action? …

<!-- @segment an10.218:11.2 -->

These are the three kinds of successful mental action.

<!-- @segment an10.218:12.1 -->

When their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a good place, in heaven because of these three kinds of successful bodily action, these four kinds of successful verbal action, or these three kinds of successful mental action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. …”
