---
slug: an11.1
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: What’s the Goal?
---

<!-- @segment an11.1:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment an11.1:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment an11.1:1.3 -->

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

<!-- @segment an11.1:1.4 -->

“Sir, what is the goal and benefit of skillful ethics?”

<!-- @segment an11.1:1.5 -->

“Ānanda, having no regrets is the goal and benefit of skillful ethics.”

<!-- @segment an11.1:2.1 -->

“But what is the goal and benefit of having no regrets?”

<!-- @segment an11.1:2.2 -->

“Joy is the goal and benefit of having no regrets.”

<!-- @segment an11.1:3.1 -->

“But what is the goal and benefit of joy?”

<!-- @segment an11.1:3.2 -->

“Rapture …”

<!-- @segment an11.1:4.1 -->

“But what is the goal and benefit of rapture?”

<!-- @segment an11.1:4.2 -->

“Tranquility …”

<!-- @segment an11.1:5.1 -->

“But what is the goal and benefit of tranquility?”

<!-- @segment an11.1:5.2 -->

“Bliss …”

<!-- @segment an11.1:6.1 -->

“But what is the goal and benefit of bliss?”

<!-- @segment an11.1:6.2 -->

“Immersion …”

<!-- @segment an11.1:7.1 -->

“But what is the goal and benefit of immersion?”

<!-- @segment an11.1:7.2 -->

“Truly knowing and seeing …”

<!-- @segment an11.1:8.1 -->

“But what is the goal and benefit of truly knowing and seeing?”

<!-- @segment an11.1:8.2 -->

“Disillusionment …”

<!-- @segment an11.1:9.1 -->

“But what is the goal and benefit of disillusionment?”

<!-- @segment an11.1:9.2 -->

“Dispassion …”

<!-- @segment an11.1:10.1 -->

“But what is the goal and benefit of dispassion?”

<!-- @segment an11.1:10.2 -->

“Knowledge and vision of freedom is the goal and benefit of dispassion.

<!-- @segment an11.1:11.1 -->

So, Ānanda, the goal and benefit of skillful ethics is not having regrets.

<!-- @segment an11.1:11.2 -->

Joy is the goal and benefit of not having regrets.

<!-- @segment an11.1:11.3 -->

Rapture is the goal and benefit of joy.

<!-- @segment an11.1:11.4 -->

Tranquility is the goal and benefit of rapture.

<!-- @segment an11.1:11.5 -->

Bliss is the goal and benefit of tranquility.

<!-- @segment an11.1:11.6 -->

Immersion is the goal and benefit of bliss.

<!-- @segment an11.1:11.7 -->

Truly knowing and seeing is the goal and benefit of immersion.

<!-- @segment an11.1:11.8 -->

Disillusionment is the goal and benefit of truly knowing and seeing.

<!-- @segment an11.1:11.9 -->

Dispassion is the goal and benefit of disillusionment.

<!-- @segment an11.1:11.10 -->

And knowledge and vision of freedom is the goal and benefit of dispassion.

<!-- @segment an11.1:11.11 -->

So, Ānanda, skillful ethics progressively lead up to the highest.”
