---
slug: an11.19
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Immersion (2nd)
description: The Buddha teaches on immersion (2nd), presenting a elevenfold teaching for disciples on the path.
qualities: ending, craving, giving up, collectedness
theme: training guideline
---

<!-- @segment an11.19:1.1 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,

<!-- @segment an11.19:1.2 -->

“Mendicants!”

<!-- @segment an11.19:1.3 -->

“Venerable sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment an11.19:1.4 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment an11.19:2.1 -->

“Could it be, mendicants, that a mendicant might gain a state of immersion like this? They wouldn’t perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn’t perceive the dimension of infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. They wouldn’t perceive this world in this world, or the other world in the other world. And they wouldn’t perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or explored by the mind. And yet they would still perceive.”

<!-- @segment an11.19:2.2 -->

“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge. Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The mendicants will listen and remember it.”

<!-- @segment an11.19:3.1 -->

“Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment an11.19:3.2 -->

“Yes, sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment an11.19:3.3 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment an11.19:4.1 -->

“A mendicant could gain such a state of immersion.”

<!-- @segment an11.19:5.1 -->

“But how could this be?”

<!-- @segment an11.19:6.1 -->

“It’s when a mendicant perceives:

<!-- @segment an11.19:6.2 -->

‘This is peaceful; this is sublime—that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment.’

<!-- @segment an11.19:6.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant might gain a state of immersion like this. They wouldn’t perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn’t perceive the dimension of infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. They wouldn’t perceive this world in this world, or the other world in the other world. And they wouldn’t perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or explored by the mind. And yet they would still perceive.”
