---
slug: an11.11
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Mahānāma (1st)
---

<!-- @segment an11.11:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery.

<!-- @segment an11.11:1.2 -->

At that time several mendicants were making a robe for the Buddha, thinking that

<!-- @segment an11.11:1.3 -->

when his robe was finished and the three months of the rains residence had passed the Buddha would set out wandering.

<!-- @segment an11.11:1.4 -->

Mahānāma the Sakyan heard about this.

<!-- @segment an11.11:1.5 -->



<!-- @segment an11.11:1.6 -->



<!-- @segment an11.11:2.1 -->

He went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

<!-- @segment an11.11:2.2 -->

“Sir, I have heard that

<!-- @segment an11.11:2.3 -->

several mendicants are making a robe for the Buddha, thinking that

<!-- @segment an11.11:2.4 -->

when his robe was finished and the three months of the rains residence had passed the Buddha would set out wandering.

<!-- @segment an11.11:2.5 -->

Now, we spend our life in various ways. Which of these should we practice?”

<!-- @segment an11.11:3.1 -->

“Good, good, Mahānāma!

<!-- @segment an11.11:3.2 -->

It’s appropriate that gentlemen such as you come to me and ask:

<!-- @segment an11.11:3.3 -->

‘We spend our life in various ways. Which of these should we practice?’

<!-- @segment an11.11:3.4 -->

The faithful succeed, not the faithless.

<!-- @segment an11.11:3.5 -->

The energetic succeed, not the lazy.

<!-- @segment an11.11:3.6 -->

The mindful succeed, not the unmindful.

<!-- @segment an11.11:3.7 -->

Those with immersion succeed, not those without immersion.

<!-- @segment an11.11:3.8 -->

The wise succeed, not the witless.

<!-- @segment an11.11:3.9 -->

When you’re grounded on these five things, go on to develop six further things.

<!-- @segment an11.11:3.10 -->

Firstly, you should recollect the Realized One:

<!-- @segment an11.11:3.11 -->

‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’

<!-- @segment an11.11:3.12 -->

When a noble disciple recollects the Realized One their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion.

<!-- @segment an11.11:3.13 -->

At that time their mind is quite unswerving, based on the Realized One.

<!-- @segment an11.11:3.14 -->

A noble disciple whose mind is unswerving finds inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and finds joy connected with the teaching.

<!-- @segment an11.11:3.15 -->

When they’re joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, they feel bliss. And when they’re blissful, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi.

<!-- @segment an11.11:3.16 -->

This is called a noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They’ve entered the stream of the teaching and developed the recollection of the Buddha.

<!-- @segment an11.11:4.1 -->

Furthermore, you should recollect the teaching:

<!-- @segment an11.11:4.2 -->

‘The teaching is well explained by the Buddha—apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.’

<!-- @segment an11.11:4.3 -->

When a noble disciple recollects the teaching their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. …

<!-- @segment an11.11:4.4 -->



<!-- @segment an11.11:4.5 -->



<!-- @segment an11.11:4.6 -->



<!-- @segment an11.11:4.7 -->

This is called a noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They’ve entered the stream of the teaching and developed the recollection of the teaching.

<!-- @segment an11.11:5.1 -->

Furthermore, you should recollect the Saṅgha:

<!-- @segment an11.11:5.2 -->

‘The Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples is practicing the way that’s good, direct, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight individual persons. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with cupped palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.’

<!-- @segment an11.11:5.3 -->

When a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. …

<!-- @segment an11.11:5.4 -->



<!-- @segment an11.11:5.5 -->



<!-- @segment an11.11:5.6 -->



<!-- @segment an11.11:5.7 -->

This is called a noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They’ve entered the stream of the teaching and developed the recollection of the Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment an11.11:6.1 -->

Furthermore, you should recollect your own ethical conduct, which is intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion.

<!-- @segment an11.11:6.2 -->

When a noble disciple recollects their ethical conduct their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. …

<!-- @segment an11.11:6.3 -->



<!-- @segment an11.11:6.4 -->



<!-- @segment an11.11:6.5 -->



<!-- @segment an11.11:6.6 -->

This is called a noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They’ve entered the stream of the teaching and developed the recollection of their ethical conduct.

<!-- @segment an11.11:7.1 -->

Furthermore, you should recollect your own generosity:

<!-- @segment an11.11:7.2 -->

‘I’m so fortunate, so very fortunate.

<!-- @segment an11.11:7.3 -->

Among people with hearts full of the stain of stinginess I live at home rid of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share.’

<!-- @segment an11.11:7.4 -->

When a noble disciple recollects their own generosity their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. …

<!-- @segment an11.11:7.5 -->



<!-- @segment an11.11:7.6 -->



<!-- @segment an11.11:7.7 -->



<!-- @segment an11.11:7.8 -->

This is called a noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They’ve entered the stream of the teaching and developed the recollection of generosity.

<!-- @segment an11.11:8.1 -->

Furthermore, you should recollect the deities:

<!-- @segment an11.11:8.2 -->

‘There are the gods of the four great kings, the gods of the thirty-three, the gods of Yama, the joyful gods, the gods who love to create, the gods who control what is created by others, the gods of the Divinity’s host, and gods even higher than these.

<!-- @segment an11.11:8.3 -->

When those deities passed away from here, they were reborn there because of their faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. I, too, have the same kind of faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom.’

<!-- @segment an11.11:8.4 -->



<!-- @segment an11.11:8.5 -->



<!-- @segment an11.11:8.6 -->



<!-- @segment an11.11:8.7 -->



<!-- @segment an11.11:8.8 -->

When a noble disciple recollects the faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom of both themselves and the deities their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion.

<!-- @segment an11.11:8.9 -->

At that time their mind is quite unswerving, based on the deities.

<!-- @segment an11.11:8.10 -->

A noble disciple whose mind is unswerving finds inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and finds joy connected with the teaching.

<!-- @segment an11.11:8.11 -->

When they’re joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, they feel bliss. And when they’re blissful, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi.

<!-- @segment an11.11:8.12 -->

This is called a noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They’ve entered the stream of the teaching and developed the recollection of the deities.”
