---
slug: an11.13
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Nandiya
---

<!-- @segment an11.13:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery.

<!-- @segment an11.13:1.2 -->

Now at that time the Buddha wanted to commence the rains residence at Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment an11.13:2.1 -->

Nandiya the Sakyan heard about this,

<!-- @segment an11.13:2.2 -->



<!-- @segment an11.13:2.3 -->

and thought,

<!-- @segment an11.13:2.4 -->

“Why don’t I also commence the rains residence at Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment an11.13:2.5 -->

There I can focus on my work and from time to time get to see the Buddha.”

<!-- @segment an11.13:3.1 -->

So the Buddha commenced the rains residence in Sāvatthī,

<!-- @segment an11.13:3.2 -->

and so did Nandiya.

<!-- @segment an11.13:3.3 -->

There he focused on his work and from time to time got to see the Buddha.

<!-- @segment an11.13:3.4 -->

At that time several mendicants were making a robe for the Buddha, thinking that

<!-- @segment an11.13:3.5 -->

when his robe was finished and the three months of the rains residence had passed the Buddha would set out wandering.

<!-- @segment an11.13:4.1 -->

Nandiya the Sakyan heard about this.

<!-- @segment an11.13:4.2 -->



<!-- @segment an11.13:4.3 -->



<!-- @segment an11.13:4.4 -->

He went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

<!-- @segment an11.13:4.5 -->

“Sir, I have heard that

<!-- @segment an11.13:4.6 -->

several mendicants are making a robe for the Buddha, thinking that

<!-- @segment an11.13:4.7 -->

when his robe was finished and the three months of the rains residence had passed the Buddha would set out wandering.

<!-- @segment an11.13:4.8 -->

Now, we spend our life in various ways. Which of these should we practice?”

<!-- @segment an11.13:5.1 -->

“Good, good Nandiya!

<!-- @segment an11.13:5.2 -->

It’s appropriate that gentlemen such as you come to me and ask:

<!-- @segment an11.13:5.3 -->

‘We spend our life in various ways. Which of these should we practice?’

<!-- @segment an11.13:5.4 -->

The faithful succeed, not the faithless.

<!-- @segment an11.13:5.5 -->

The ethical succeed, not the unethical.

<!-- @segment an11.13:5.6 -->

The energetic succeed, not the lazy.

<!-- @segment an11.13:5.7 -->

The mindful succeed, not the unmindful.

<!-- @segment an11.13:5.8 -->

Those with immersion succeed, not those without immersion.

<!-- @segment an11.13:5.9 -->

The wise succeed, not the witless.

<!-- @segment an11.13:5.10 -->

When you’re grounded on these six things, go on to establish mindfulness on five further things internally.

<!-- @segment an11.13:6.1 -->

Firstly, you should recollect the Realized One:

<!-- @segment an11.13:6.2 -->

‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’

<!-- @segment an11.13:6.3 -->

In this way you should establish mindfulness internally based on the Realized One.

<!-- @segment an11.13:7.1 -->

Furthermore, you should recollect the teaching:

<!-- @segment an11.13:7.2 -->

‘The teaching is well explained by the Buddha—apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.’

<!-- @segment an11.13:7.3 -->

In this way you should establish mindfulness internally based on the teaching.

<!-- @segment an11.13:8.1 -->

Furthermore, you should recollect your good friends:

<!-- @segment an11.13:8.2 -->

‘I’m fortunate, so very fortunate,

<!-- @segment an11.13:8.3 -->

to have good friends who advise and instruct me out of kindness and sympathy.’

<!-- @segment an11.13:8.4 -->

In this way you should establish mindfulness internally based on good friends.

<!-- @segment an11.13:9.1 -->

Furthermore, you should recollect your own generosity:

<!-- @segment an11.13:9.2 -->

‘I’m so fortunate, so very fortunate.

<!-- @segment an11.13:9.3 -->

Among people with hearts full of the stain of stinginess I live at home rid of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share.’

<!-- @segment an11.13:9.4 -->

In this way you should establish mindfulness internally based on generosity.

<!-- @segment an11.13:10.1 -->

Furthermore, you should recollect the deities:

<!-- @segment an11.13:10.2 -->

‘There are deities who, surpassing the company of deities that consume edible food, are reborn in a certain host of mind-made deities. They don’t see in themselves anything more to do, or anything that needs improvement.’

<!-- @segment an11.13:10.3 -->

An irreversibly freed mendicant doesn’t see in themselves anything more to do, or anything that needs improvement.

<!-- @segment an11.13:10.4 -->

In the same way, Nandiya, there are deities who, surpassing the company of deities that consume edible food, are reborn in a certain host of mind-made deities. They don’t see in themselves anything more to do, or anything that needs improvement.

<!-- @segment an11.13:10.5 -->

In this way you should establish mindfulness internally based on the deities.

<!-- @segment an11.13:11.1 -->

A noble disciple who possesses these eleven qualities gives up bad, unskillful qualities and doesn’t cling to them.

<!-- @segment an11.13:11.2 -->

It’s like when a pot full of water is tipped over, so the water drains out and doesn’t go back in.

<!-- @segment an11.13:11.3 -->

Suppose there was an uncontrolled fire. It advances burning up dry woodlands and doesn’t turn back over what it has burned.

<!-- @segment an11.13:11.4 -->

In the same way, a noble disciple who possesses these eleven qualities gives up bad, unskillful qualities and doesn’t cling to them.”
