---
slug: an11.8
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Focus
---

<!-- @segment an11.8:1.1 -->

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

<!-- @segment an11.8:2.1 -->

“Could it be, sir, that a mendicant might gain a state of immersion like this. They wouldn’t focus on the eye or sights, ear or sounds, nose or smells, tongue or tastes, or body or touches. They wouldn’t focus on earth in earth, water in water, fire in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn’t focus on the dimension of infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. They wouldn’t focus on this world in this world, or the other world in the other world. And they wouldn’t focus on what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or explored by the mind.

<!-- @segment an11.8:2.2 -->

Yet they would focus?”

<!-- @segment an11.8:3.1 -->

“It could be, Ānanda.”

<!-- @segment an11.8:3.2 -->



<!-- @segment an11.8:4.1 -->

“But how could this be?”

<!-- @segment an11.8:4.2 -->



<!-- @segment an11.8:4.3 -->



<!-- @segment an11.8:5.1 -->

“Ānanda, it’s when a mendicant focuses thus:

<!-- @segment an11.8:5.2 -->

‘This is peaceful; this is sublime—that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment.’

<!-- @segment an11.8:5.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant might gain a state of immersion like this. They wouldn’t focus on the eye or sights, ear or sounds, nose or smells, tongue or tastes, or body or touches. …

<!-- @segment an11.8:5.4 -->

And they wouldn’t focus on what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or explored by the mind.

<!-- @segment an11.8:5.5 -->

Yet they would focus.”
