---
slug: an11.5
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Vital Conditions (3rd)
description: The Buddha teaches on vital conditions (3rd), presenting a elevenfold teaching for disciples on the path.
qualities: quenching, vision, dispassion, joy, tranquility, true knowledge
theme: training guideline, inspiration
---

<!-- @segment an11.5:1.1 -->

There Venerable Ānanda addressed the mendicants …

<!-- @segment an11.5:1.2 -->

“An unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a vital condition for not having regrets.

<!-- @segment an11.5:1.3 -->

When there are regrets, one who has regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy.

<!-- @segment an11.5:1.4 -->

When there is no joy, one who lacks joy has destroyed a vital condition for rapture.

<!-- @segment an11.5:1.5 -->

When there is no rapture, one who lacks rapture has destroyed a vital condition for tranquility.

<!-- @segment an11.5:1.6 -->

When there is no tranquility, one who lacks tranquility has destroyed a vital condition for bliss.

<!-- @segment an11.5:1.7 -->

When there is no bliss, one who lacks bliss has destroyed a vital condition for right immersion.

<!-- @segment an11.5:1.8 -->

When there is no right immersion, one who lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true knowledge and vision.

<!-- @segment an11.5:1.9 -->

When there is no true knowledge and vision, one who lacks true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for disillusionment.

<!-- @segment an11.5:1.10 -->

When there is no disillusionment, one who lacks disillusionment has destroyed a vital condition for dispassion.

<!-- @segment an11.5:1.11 -->

When there is no dispassion, one who lacks dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

<!-- @segment an11.5:2.1 -->

Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness.

<!-- @segment an11.5:2.2 -->

In the same way, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a vital condition for having no regrets.

<!-- @segment an11.5:2.3 -->

When there are regrets, one who has regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy. …

<!-- @segment an11.5:2.4 -->

When there is no dispassion, one who lacks dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

<!-- @segment an11.5:3.1 -->

An ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital condition for not having regrets.

<!-- @segment an11.5:3.2 -->

When there are no regrets, one who has no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy.

<!-- @segment an11.5:3.3 -->

When there is joy, one who has fulfilled joy has fulfilled a vital condition for rapture.

<!-- @segment an11.5:3.4 -->

When there is rapture, one who has fulfilled rapture has fulfilled a vital condition for tranquility.

<!-- @segment an11.5:3.5 -->

When there is tranquility, one who has fulfilled tranquility has fulfilled a vital condition for bliss.

<!-- @segment an11.5:3.6 -->

When there is bliss, one who has fulfilled bliss has fulfilled a vital condition for right immersion.

<!-- @segment an11.5:3.7 -->

When there is right immersion, one who has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true knowledge and vision.

<!-- @segment an11.5:3.8 -->

When there is true knowledge and vision, one who has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition for disillusionment.

<!-- @segment an11.5:3.9 -->

When there is disillusionment, one who has fulfilled disillusionment has fulfilled a vital condition for dispassion.

<!-- @segment an11.5:3.10 -->

When there is dispassion, one who has fulfilled dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

<!-- @segment an11.5:4.1 -->

Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage. Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would grow to fullness.

<!-- @segment an11.5:4.2 -->

In the same way, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital condition for not having regrets.

<!-- @segment an11.5:4.3 -->

When there are no regrets, one who has no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy. …

<!-- @segment an11.5:4.4 -->

When there is dispassion, one who has fulfilled dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.”
