---
slug: an11.17
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Cowherd
description: The Buddha teaches on the cowherd, presenting a elevenfold teaching for disciples on the path.
qualities: cultivation, respect, contentment, harm, unwholesome, learned
theme: story, recollection of the Buddha
---

<!-- @segment an11.17:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, a cowherd with eleven factors can’t maintain and expand a herd of cattle.

<!-- @segment an11.17:1.2 -->

What eleven?

<!-- @segment an11.17:1.3 -->

It’s when a cowherd doesn’t know form, is unskilled in characteristics, doesn’t pick out flies’ eggs, doesn’t dress wounds, doesn’t spread smoke, doesn’t know the ford, doesn’t know satisfaction, doesn’t know the trail, is not skilled in pastures, milks dry, and doesn’t show extra respect to the bulls who are fathers and captains of the herd.

<!-- @segment an11.17:1.4 -->

A cowherd with these eleven factors can’t maintain and expand a herd of cattle.

<!-- @segment an11.17:2.1 -->

In the same way, a mendicant with eleven qualities can’t achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training.

<!-- @segment an11.17:2.2 -->

What eleven?

<!-- @segment an11.17:2.3 -->

It’s when a mendicant doesn’t know form, is unskilled in characteristics, doesn’t pick out flies’ eggs, doesn’t dress wounds, doesn’t spread smoke, doesn’t know the ford, doesn’t know satisfaction, doesn’t know the trail, is not skilled in pastures, milks dry, and doesn’t show extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment an11.17:3.1 -->

And how does a mendicant not know form?

<!-- @segment an11.17:3.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant doesn’t truly understand that all form is the four principal states, or form derived from the four principal states.

<!-- @segment an11.17:3.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant doesn’t know form.

<!-- @segment an11.17:4.1 -->

And how is a mendicant not skilled in characteristics?

<!-- @segment an11.17:4.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant doesn’t understand that a fool is characterized by their deeds, and an astute person is characterized by their deeds.

<!-- @segment an11.17:4.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant isn’t skilled in characteristics.

<!-- @segment an11.17:5.1 -->

And how does a mendicant not pick out flies’ eggs?

<!-- @segment an11.17:5.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant tolerates a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought that has arisen. They don’t give it up, get rid of it, eliminate it, and obliterate it.

<!-- @segment an11.17:5.3 -->

They tolerate any bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen. They don’t give them up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them.

<!-- @segment an11.17:5.4 -->

That’s how a mendicant doesn’t pick out flies’ eggs.

<!-- @segment an11.17:6.1 -->

And how does a mendicant not dress wounds?

<!-- @segment an11.17:6.2 -->

When a mendicant sees a sight with their eyes, they get caught up in the features and details.

<!-- @segment an11.17:6.3 -->

Since the faculty of sight is left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure become overwhelming. They don’t practice restraint, they don’t protect the faculty of sight, and they don’t achieve its restraint.

<!-- @segment an11.17:6.4 -->

When they hear a sound with their ears …

<!-- @segment an11.17:6.5 -->

When they smell an odor with their nose …

<!-- @segment an11.17:6.6 -->

When they taste a flavor with their tongue …

<!-- @segment an11.17:6.7 -->

When they feel a touch with their body …

<!-- @segment an11.17:6.8 -->

When they know an idea with their mind, they get caught up in the features and details.

<!-- @segment an11.17:6.9 -->

Since the faculty of the mind is left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure become overwhelming. They don’t practice restraint, they don’t protect the faculty of the mind, and they don’t achieve its restraint.

<!-- @segment an11.17:6.10 -->

That’s how a mendicant doesn’t dress wounds.

<!-- @segment an11.17:7.1 -->

And how does a mendicant not spread smoke?

<!-- @segment an11.17:7.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant doesn’t teach others the Dhamma in detail as they learned and memorized it.

<!-- @segment an11.17:7.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant doesn’t spread smoke.

<!-- @segment an11.17:8.1 -->

And how does a mendicant not know the ford?

<!-- @segment an11.17:8.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant doesn’t from time to time go up to those mendicants who are very learned—inheritors of the heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the outlines—and ask them questions:

<!-- @segment an11.17:8.3 -->

‘Why, sir, does it say this? What does that mean?’

<!-- @segment an11.17:8.4 -->

Those venerables don’t reveal what is hidden, clarify what is unclear, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters.

<!-- @segment an11.17:8.5 -->

That’s how a mendicant doesn’t know the ford.

<!-- @segment an11.17:9.1 -->

And how does a mendicant not know satisfaction?

<!-- @segment an11.17:9.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant, when the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One are being taught, finds no inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and finds no joy connected with the teaching.

<!-- @segment an11.17:9.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant doesn’t know satisfaction.

<!-- @segment an11.17:10.1 -->

And how does a mendicant not know the trail?

<!-- @segment an11.17:10.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant doesn’t truly understand the noble eightfold path.

<!-- @segment an11.17:10.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant doesn’t know the trail.

<!-- @segment an11.17:11.1 -->

And how is a mendicant not skilled in pastures?

<!-- @segment an11.17:11.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant doesn’t truly understand the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.

<!-- @segment an11.17:11.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant is not skilled in pastures.

<!-- @segment an11.17:12.1 -->

And how does a mendicant milk dry?

<!-- @segment an11.17:12.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant is invited by a householder to accept robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. But they don’t know moderation in accepting.

<!-- @segment an11.17:12.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant milks dry.

<!-- @segment an11.17:13.1 -->

And how does a mendicant not show extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha?

<!-- @segment an11.17:13.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant doesn’t consistently treat senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha with kindness by way of body, speech, and mind, both in public and in private.

<!-- @segment an11.17:13.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant doesn’t show extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment an11.17:14.1 -->

A mendicant with these eleven qualities can’t achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training.

<!-- @segment an11.17:15.1 -->

A cowherd with eleven factors can maintain and expand a herd of cattle.

<!-- @segment an11.17:15.2 -->

What eleven?

<!-- @segment an11.17:15.3 -->

It’s when a cowherd knows form, is skilled in characteristics, picks out flies’ eggs, dresses wounds, spreads smoke, knows the ford, knows satisfaction, knows the trail, is skilled in pastures, doesn’t milk dry, and shows extra respect to the bulls who are fathers and captains of the herd.

<!-- @segment an11.17:15.4 -->

A cowherd with these eleven factors can maintain and expand a herd of cattle.

<!-- @segment an11.17:16.1 -->

In the same way, a mendicant with eleven qualities can achieve growth, improvement, and maturity in this teaching and training.

<!-- @segment an11.17:16.2 -->

What eleven?

<!-- @segment an11.17:16.3 -->

It’s when a mendicant knows form, is skilled in characteristics, picks out flies’ eggs, dresses wounds, spreads smoke, knows the ford, knows satisfaction, knows the trail, is skilled in pastures, doesn’t milk dry, and shows extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment an11.17:17.1 -->

And how does a mendicant know form?

<!-- @segment an11.17:17.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant truly understands that all form is the four principal states, or form derived from the four principal states.

<!-- @segment an11.17:17.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant knows form.

<!-- @segment an11.17:18.1 -->

And how is a mendicant skilled in characteristics?

<!-- @segment an11.17:18.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant understands that a fool is characterized by their deeds, and an astute person is characterized by their deeds.

<!-- @segment an11.17:18.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant is skilled in characteristics.

<!-- @segment an11.17:19.1 -->

And how does a mendicant pick out flies’ eggs?

<!-- @segment an11.17:19.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant doesn’t tolerate a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought that has arisen, but gives it up, gets rid of it, eliminates it, and exterminates it. They don’t tolerate any bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen, but give them up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them.

<!-- @segment an11.17:19.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant picks out flies’ eggs.

<!-- @segment an11.17:20.1 -->

And how does a mendicant dress wounds?

<!-- @segment an11.17:20.2 -->

When a mendicant sees a sight with their eyes, they don’t get caught up in the features and details.

<!-- @segment an11.17:20.3 -->

If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint.

<!-- @segment an11.17:20.4 -->

When they hear a sound with their ears …

<!-- @segment an11.17:20.5 -->

When they smell an odor with their nose …

<!-- @segment an11.17:20.6 -->

When they taste a flavor with their tongue …

<!-- @segment an11.17:20.7 -->

When they feel a touch with their body …

<!-- @segment an11.17:20.8 -->

When they know an idea with their mind, they don’t get caught up in the features and details.

<!-- @segment an11.17:20.9 -->

If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint.

<!-- @segment an11.17:20.10 -->

That’s how a mendicant dresses wounds.

<!-- @segment an11.17:21.1 -->

And how does a mendicant spread smoke?

<!-- @segment an11.17:21.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant teaches others the Dhamma in detail as they learned and memorized it.

<!-- @segment an11.17:21.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant spreads smoke.

<!-- @segment an11.17:22.1 -->

And how does a mendicant know the ford?

<!-- @segment an11.17:22.2 -->

It’s when from time to time a mendicant goes up to those mendicants who are very learned—inheritors of the heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the outlines—and asks them questions:

<!-- @segment an11.17:22.3 -->

‘Why, sir, does it say this? What does that mean?’

<!-- @segment an11.17:22.4 -->

Those venerables reveal what is hidden, clarify what is unclear, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters.

<!-- @segment an11.17:22.5 -->

That’s how a mendicant knows the ford.

<!-- @segment an11.17:23.1 -->

And how does a mendicant know satisfaction?

<!-- @segment an11.17:23.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant, when the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One are being taught, finds inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and finds joy connected with the teaching.

<!-- @segment an11.17:23.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant knows satisfaction.

<!-- @segment an11.17:24.1 -->

And how does a mendicant know the trail?

<!-- @segment an11.17:24.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant truly understands the noble eightfold path.

<!-- @segment an11.17:24.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant knows the trail.

<!-- @segment an11.17:25.1 -->

And how is a mendicant skilled in pastures?

<!-- @segment an11.17:25.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant truly understands the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.

<!-- @segment an11.17:25.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant is skilled in pastures.

<!-- @segment an11.17:26.1 -->

And how does a mendicant not milk dry?

<!-- @segment an11.17:26.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant is invited by a householder to accept robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.

<!-- @segment an11.17:26.3 -->

And that mendicant knows moderation in accepting.

<!-- @segment an11.17:26.4 -->

That’s how a mendicant doesn’t milk dry.

<!-- @segment an11.17:27.1 -->

And how does a mendicant show extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha?

<!-- @segment an11.17:27.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant consistently treats senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha with kindness by way of body, speech, and mind, both in public and in private.

<!-- @segment an11.17:27.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant shows extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment an11.17:28.1 -->

A mendicant with these eleven qualities can achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training.”
