---
slug: an11.14
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Subhūti
description: The Buddha teaches Venerable Subh on with subhūti, presenting a elevenfold teaching for disciples on the path.
qualities: faith, wholesome, learning, harm, right view, wrong view
theme: urgency, recollection of the Buddha
---

<!-- @segment an11.14:1.1 -->

And then Venerable Subhūti together with the mendicant Saddha went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him,

<!-- @segment an11.14:1.2 -->

“Subhūti, what is the name of this mendicant?”

<!-- @segment an11.14:1.3 -->

“Sir, the name of this mendicant is Saddha. He is the son of the layman Sudatta, and has gone forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness.”

<!-- @segment an11.14:2.1 -->

“Well, I hope this mendicant Saddha exhibits the various evidences of faith.”

<!-- @segment an11.14:2.2 -->

“Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One!

<!-- @segment an11.14:2.3 -->

Let the Buddha to speak on the evidence of faith.

<!-- @segment an11.14:2.4 -->

Now I will find out whether or not this mendicant Saddha exhibits the various evidences of faith.”

<!-- @segment an11.14:3.1 -->

“Well then, Subhūti, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment an11.14:3.2 -->

“Yes, sir,” Subhūti replied.

<!-- @segment an11.14:3.3 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment an11.14:4.1 -->

“Firstly, a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken.

<!-- @segment an11.14:4.2 -->

When a mendicant is ethical, this is evidence of faith.

<!-- @segment an11.14:5.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant is very learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and penetrating them theoretically.

<!-- @segment an11.14:5.2 -->

When a mendicant is learned, this is evidence of faith.

<!-- @segment an11.14:6.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant has good friends, companions, and associates.

<!-- @segment an11.14:6.2 -->

When a mendicant has good friends, this is evidence of faith.

<!-- @segment an11.14:7.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant is easy to admonish, having qualities that make them easy to admonish. They’re patient, and take instruction respectfully.

<!-- @segment an11.14:7.2 -->

When a mendicant is easy to admonish, this is evidence of faith.

<!-- @segment an11.14:8.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant is deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of duties for their spiritual companions, understanding how to go about things in order to complete and organize the work.

<!-- @segment an11.14:8.2 -->

When a mendicant is deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of duties, this is evidence of faith.

<!-- @segment an11.14:9.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant loves the teachings and is a delight to converse with, being full of joy in the teaching and training.

<!-- @segment an11.14:9.2 -->

When a mendicant loves the teachings, this is evidence of faith.

<!-- @segment an11.14:10.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities.

<!-- @segment an11.14:10.2 -->

When a mendicant is energetic, this is evidence of faith.

<!-- @segment an11.14:11.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant gets the four absorptions—blissful meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty.

<!-- @segment an11.14:11.2 -->

When a mendicant gets the four absorptions, this is evidence of faith.

<!-- @segment an11.14:12.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant recollects many kinds of past lives.

<!-- @segment an11.14:12.2 -->

That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. They remember: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details.

<!-- @segment an11.14:12.3 -->

When a mendicant recollects many kinds of past lives, this is evidence of faith.

<!-- @segment an11.14:13.1 -->

Furthermore, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, a mendicant sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. ‘These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds.

<!-- @segment an11.14:13.2 -->

When a mendicant has clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, this is evidence of faith.

<!-- @segment an11.14:14.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and lives having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.

<!-- @segment an11.14:14.2 -->

When a mendicant has ended the defilements, this is evidence of faith.”

<!-- @segment an11.14:15.1 -->

When he said this, Venerable Subhūti said to the Buddha:

<!-- @segment an11.14:15.2 -->

“Sir, the various evidences of faith for a faithful person that the Buddha speaks of are found in this mendicant; he does exhibit them.

<!-- @segment an11.14:16.1 -->

This mendicant is ethical …

<!-- @segment an11.14:17.1 -->

This mendicant is learned …

<!-- @segment an11.14:18.1 -->

This mendicant has good friends …

<!-- @segment an11.14:19.1 -->

This mendicant is easy to admonish …

<!-- @segment an11.14:20.1 -->

This mendicant is deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of duties …

<!-- @segment an11.14:21.1 -->

This mendicant loves the teachings …

<!-- @segment an11.14:22.1 -->

This mendicant is energetic …

<!-- @segment an11.14:23.1 -->

This mendicant gets the four absorptions …

<!-- @segment an11.14:24.1 -->

This mendicant recollects their many kinds of past lives …

<!-- @segment an11.14:25.1 -->

This mendicant has clairvoyance that is purified and surpasses the human …

<!-- @segment an11.14:26.1 -->

This mendicant has ended the defilements …

<!-- @segment an11.14:26.2 -->

The various evidences of faith for a faithful person that the Buddha speaks of are found in this mendicant; he does exhibit them.”

<!-- @segment an11.14:27.1 -->

“Good, good, Subhūti!

<!-- @segment an11.14:27.2 -->

So, Subhūti, you should live together with this mendicant Saddha.

<!-- @segment an11.14:27.3 -->

And when you want to see the Realized One, you should come together with him.”
