---
slug: mn10
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Mindfulness Meditation
---

<!-- @segment mn10:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn10:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Kurus, near the Kuru town named Kammāsadamma.

<!-- @segment mn10:1.3 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,

<!-- @segment mn10:1.4 -->

“Mendicants!”

<!-- @segment mn10:1.5 -->

“Venerable sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment mn10:1.6 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment mn10:2.1 -->

“Mendicants, the four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to convergence. They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment.

<!-- @segment mn10:3.1 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment mn10:3.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment mn10:3.3 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment mn10:3.4 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of the mind—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment mn10:3.5 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment mn10:3.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:4.0.1 -->

1. Observing the Body

<!-- @segment mn10:4.0.2 -->

1.1. Mindfulness of Breathing

<!-- @segment mn10:4.1 -->

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of the body?

<!-- @segment mn10:4.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant—gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut—sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight, and brings mindfulness to the present.

<!-- @segment mn10:4.3 -->

Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out.

<!-- @segment mn10:4.4 -->

Breathing in heavily they know: ‘I’m breathing in heavily.’ Breathing out heavily they know: ‘I’m breathing out heavily.’

<!-- @segment mn10:4.5 -->

When breathing in lightly they know: ‘I’m breathing in lightly.’ Breathing out lightly they know: ‘I’m breathing out lightly.’

<!-- @segment mn10:4.6 -->

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing the whole body.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing the whole body.’

<!-- @segment mn10:4.7 -->

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in stilling the physical process.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out stilling the physical process.’

<!-- @segment mn10:4.8 -->

It’s like a deft carpenter or carpenter’s apprentice. When making a deep cut they know: ‘I’m making a deep cut,’ and when making a shallow cut they know: ‘I’m making a shallow cut.’

<!-- @segment mn10:4.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:4.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:4.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:5.1 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally, externally, and both internally and externally.

<!-- @segment mn10:5.2 -->

They meditate observing , with respect to the body, the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish.

<!-- @segment mn10:5.3 -->

Or mindfulness is established that the body exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment mn10:5.4 -->

That’s how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body.

<!-- @segment mn10:5.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:6.0 -->

1.2. The Postures

<!-- @segment mn10:6.1 -->

Furthermore, when a mendicant is walking they know: ‘I am walking.’ When standing they know: ‘I am standing.’ When sitting they know: ‘I am sitting.’ And when lying down they know: ‘I am lying down.’

<!-- @segment mn10:6.2 -->

Whatever posture their body is in, they know it.

<!-- @segment mn10:7.1 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally, externally, and both internally and externally.

<!-- @segment mn10:7.2 -->

With respect to the body, they meditate observing the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish.

<!-- @segment mn10:7.3 -->

Or mindfulness is established that the body exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment mn10:7.4 -->

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body.

<!-- @segment mn10:7.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:8.0 -->

1.3. Situational Awareness

<!-- @segment mn10:8.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant acts with situational awareness when going out and coming back; when looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent.

<!-- @segment mn10:9.1 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally …

<!-- @segment mn10:9.2 -->

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body.

<!-- @segment mn10:9.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:10.0 -->

1.4. Focusing on the Repulsive

<!-- @segment mn10:10.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant examines their own body, up from the soles of the feet and down from the tips of the hairs, wrapped in skin and full of many kinds of filth.

<!-- @segment mn10:10.2 -->

‘In this body there is head hair, body hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, undigested food, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva, snot, synovial fluid, urine.’

<!-- @segment mn10:10.3 -->

It’s as if there were a bag with openings at both ends, filled with various kinds of grains, such as fine rice, wheat, mung beans, peas, sesame, and ordinary rice. And a person with clear eyes were to open it and examine the contents: ‘These grains are fine rice, these are wheat, these are mung beans, these are peas, these are sesame, and these are ordinary rice.’

<!-- @segment mn10:10.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:10.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:11.1 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally …

<!-- @segment mn10:11.2 -->

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body.

<!-- @segment mn10:11.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:12.0 -->

1.5. Focusing on the Elements

<!-- @segment mn10:12.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant examines their own body, whatever its placement or posture, according to the elements:

<!-- @segment mn10:12.2 -->

‘In this body there is the earth element, the water element, the fire element, and the air element.’

<!-- @segment mn10:12.3 -->

It’s as if a deft butcher or butcher’s apprentice were to kill a cow and sit down at the crossroads with the meat cut into chops.

<!-- @segment mn10:12.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:12.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:13.1 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally …

<!-- @segment mn10:13.2 -->

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body.

<!-- @segment mn10:13.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:14.0 -->

1.6. The Charnel Ground Contemplations

<!-- @segment mn10:14.1 -->

Furthermore, suppose a mendicant were to see a corpse discarded in a charnel ground. And it had been dead for one, two, or three days, bloated, livid, and festering.

<!-- @segment mn10:14.2 -->

They’d compare it with their own body:

<!-- @segment mn10:14.3 -->

‘This body is also of that same nature, that same kind, and cannot go beyond that.’

<!-- @segment mn10:15.1 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally …

<!-- @segment mn10:15.2 -->

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body.

<!-- @segment mn10:16.1 -->

Furthermore, suppose they were to see a corpse discarded in a charnel ground being devoured by crows, hawks, vultures, herons, hounds, tigers, leopards, jackals, and many kinds of little creatures.

<!-- @segment mn10:16.2 -->

They’d compare it with their own body:

<!-- @segment mn10:16.3 -->

‘This body is also of that same nature, that same kind, and cannot go beyond that.’

<!-- @segment mn10:17.1 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally …

<!-- @segment mn10:17.2 -->

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body.

<!-- @segment mn10:18-23.1 -->

Furthermore, suppose they were to see a corpse discarded in a charnel ground, a skeleton with flesh and blood, held together by sinews …

<!-- @segment mn10:18-23.2 -->

A skeleton without flesh but smeared with blood, and held together by sinews …

<!-- @segment mn10:18-23.3 -->

A skeleton rid of flesh and blood, held together by sinews …

<!-- @segment mn10:24.1 -->

Bones rid of sinews scattered in every direction. Here a hand-bone, there a foot-bone, here an ankle bone, there a shin-bone, here a thigh-bone, there a hip-bone, here a rib-bone, there a back-bone, here an arm-bone, there a neck-bone, here a jaw-bone, there a tooth, here the skull. …

<!-- @segment mn10:24.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:24.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:25.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:25.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:26-28.1 -->

White bones, the color of shells …

<!-- @segment mn10:29.1 -->

Decrepit bones, heaped in a pile …

<!-- @segment mn10:30.1 -->

Bones rotted and crumbled to powder.

<!-- @segment mn10:30.2 -->

They’d compare it with their own body:

<!-- @segment mn10:30.3 -->

‘This body is also of that same nature, that same kind, and cannot go beyond that.’

<!-- @segment mn10:31.1 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally, externally, and both internally and externally.

<!-- @segment mn10:31.2 -->

With respect to the body, they meditate observing the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish.

<!-- @segment mn10:31.3 -->

Or mindfulness is established that the body exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment mn10:31.4 -->

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body.

<!-- @segment mn10:31.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:31.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:32.0 -->

2. Observing the Feelings

<!-- @segment mn10:32.1 -->

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of feelings?

<!-- @segment mn10:32.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant who feels a pleasant feeling knows: ‘I feel a pleasant feeling.’

<!-- @segment mn10:32.3 -->

When they feel a painful feeling, they know: ‘I feel a painful feeling.’

<!-- @segment mn10:32.4 -->

When they feel a neutral feeling, they know: ‘I feel a neutral feeling.’

<!-- @segment mn10:32.5 -->

When they feel a pleasant feeling of the flesh, they know: ‘I feel a pleasant feeling of the flesh.’

<!-- @segment mn10:32.6 -->

When they feel a pleasant feeling not of the flesh, they know: ‘I feel a pleasant feeling not of the flesh.’

<!-- @segment mn10:32.7 -->

When they feel a painful feeling of the flesh, they know: ‘I feel a painful feeling of the flesh.’

<!-- @segment mn10:32.8 -->

When they feel a painful feeling not of the flesh, they know: ‘I feel a painful feeling not of the flesh.’

<!-- @segment mn10:32.9 -->

When they feel a neutral feeling of the flesh, they know: ‘I feel a neutral feeling of the flesh.’

<!-- @segment mn10:32.10 -->

When they feel a neutral feeling not of the flesh, they know: ‘I feel a neutral feeling not of the flesh.’

<!-- @segment mn10:33.1 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of feelings internally, externally, and both internally and externally.

<!-- @segment mn10:33.2 -->

With respect to feelings, they meditate observing the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish.

<!-- @segment mn10:33.3 -->

Or mindfulness is established that feelings exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment mn10:33.4 -->

That’s how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of feelings.

<!-- @segment mn10:33.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:34.0 -->

3. Observing the Mind

<!-- @segment mn10:34.1 -->

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of the mind?

<!-- @segment mn10:34.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant understands mind with greed as ‘mind with greed,’

<!-- @segment mn10:34.3 -->

and mind without greed as ‘mind without greed.’

<!-- @segment mn10:34.4 -->

They understand mind with hate as ‘mind with hate,’

<!-- @segment mn10:34.5 -->

and mind without hate as ‘mind without hate.’

<!-- @segment mn10:34.6 -->

They understand mind with delusion as ‘mind with delusion,’

<!-- @segment mn10:34.7 -->

and mind without delusion as ‘mind without delusion.’

<!-- @segment mn10:34.8 -->

They know constricted mind as ‘constricted mind,’

<!-- @segment mn10:34.9 -->

and scattered mind as ‘scattered mind.’

<!-- @segment mn10:34.10 -->

They know expansive mind as ‘expansive mind,’

<!-- @segment mn10:34.11 -->

and unexpansive mind as ‘unexpansive mind.’

<!-- @segment mn10:34.12 -->

They know mind that is not supreme as ‘mind that is not supreme,’

<!-- @segment mn10:34.13 -->

and mind that is supreme as ‘mind that is supreme.’

<!-- @segment mn10:34.14 -->

They know mind immersed in samādhi as ‘mind immersed in samādhi,’

<!-- @segment mn10:34.15 -->

and mind not immersed in samādhi as ‘mind not immersed in samādhi.’

<!-- @segment mn10:34.16 -->

They know freed mind as ‘freed mind,’

<!-- @segment mn10:34.17 -->

and unfreed mind as ‘unfreed mind.’

<!-- @segment mn10:35.1 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the mind internally, externally, and both internally and externally.

<!-- @segment mn10:35.2 -->

With respect to the mind, they meditate observing the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish.

<!-- @segment mn10:35.3 -->

Or mindfulness is established that the mind exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment mn10:35.4 -->

That’s how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the mind.

<!-- @segment mn10:35.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:36.0.1 -->

4. Observing Principles

<!-- @segment mn10:36.0.2 -->

4.1. The Hindrances

<!-- @segment mn10:36.1 -->

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of principles?

<!-- @segment mn10:36.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles with respect to the five hindrances.

<!-- @segment mn10:36.3 -->

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to the five hindrances?

<!-- @segment mn10:36.4 -->

It’s when a mendicant who has sensual desire in them understands: ‘I have sensual desire in me.’ When they don’t have sensual desire in them, they understand: ‘I don’t have sensual desire in me.’ They understand how sensual desire arises; how, when it’s already arisen, it’s given up; and how, once it’s given up, it doesn’t arise again in the future.

<!-- @segment mn10:36.5 -->

When they have ill will in them, they understand: ‘I have ill will in me.’ When they don’t have ill will in them, they understand: ‘I don’t have ill will in me.’ They understand how ill will arises; how, when it’s already arisen, it’s given up; and how, once it’s given up, it doesn’t arise again in the future.

<!-- @segment mn10:36.6 -->

When they have dullness and drowsiness in them, they understand: ‘I have dullness and drowsiness in me.’ When they don’t have dullness and drowsiness in them, they understand: ‘I don’t have dullness and drowsiness in me.’ They understand how dullness and drowsiness arise; how, when they’ve already arisen, they’re given up; and how, once they’re given up, they don’t arise again in the future.

<!-- @segment mn10:36.7 -->

When they have restlessness and remorse in them, they understand: ‘I have restlessness and remorse in me.’ When they don’t have restlessness and remorse in them, they understand: ‘I don’t have restlessness and remorse in me.’ They understand how restlessness and remorse arise; how, when they’ve already arisen, they’re given up; and how, once they’re given up, they don’t arise again in the future.

<!-- @segment mn10:36.8 -->

When they have doubt in them, they understand: ‘I have doubt in me.’ When they don’t have doubt in them, they understand: ‘I don’t have doubt in me.’ They understand how doubt arises; how, when it’s already arisen, it’s given up; and how, once it’s given up, it doesn’t arise again in the future.

<!-- @segment mn10:37.1 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally, externally, and both internally and externally.

<!-- @segment mn10:37.2 -->

They meditate observing, with respect to the principles, the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish.

<!-- @segment mn10:37.3 -->

Or mindfulness is established that principles exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment mn10:37.4 -->

That’s how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles with respect to the five hindrances.

<!-- @segment mn10:37.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:38.0 -->

4.2. The Aggregates

<!-- @segment mn10:38.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles with respect to the five grasping aggregates.

<!-- @segment mn10:38.2 -->

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to the five grasping aggregates?

<!-- @segment mn10:38.3 -->

It’s when a mendicant contemplates:

<!-- @segment mn10:38.4 -->

‘Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form.

<!-- @segment mn10:38.5 -->

Such is feeling, such is the origin of feeling, such is the ending of feeling.

<!-- @segment mn10:38.6 -->

Such is perception, such is the origin of perception, such is the ending of perception.

<!-- @segment mn10:38.7 -->

Such are choices, such is the origin of choices, such is the ending of choices.

<!-- @segment mn10:38.8 -->

Such is consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness.’

<!-- @segment mn10:39.1 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally …

<!-- @segment mn10:39.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:39.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:39.4 -->

That’s how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles with respect to the five grasping aggregates.

<!-- @segment mn10:39.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:40.0 -->

4.3. The Sense Fields

<!-- @segment mn10:40.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles with respect to the six interior and exterior sense fields.

<!-- @segment mn10:40.2 -->

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to the six interior and exterior sense fields?

<!-- @segment mn10:40.3 -->

It’s when a mendicant understands the eye, sights, and the fetter that arises dependent on both of these. They understand how the fetter that has not arisen comes to arise; how the arisen fetter comes to be abandoned; and how the abandoned fetter comes to not rise again in the future.

<!-- @segment mn10:40.4 -->

They understand the ear, sounds, and the fetter …

<!-- @segment mn10:40.5 -->

They understand the nose, smells, and the fetter …

<!-- @segment mn10:40.6 -->

They understand the tongue, tastes, and the fetter …

<!-- @segment mn10:40.7 -->

They understand the body, touches, and the fetter …

<!-- @segment mn10:40.8 -->

They understand the mind, ideas, and the fetter that arises dependent on both of these. They understand how the fetter that has not arisen comes to arise; how the arisen fetter comes to be abandoned; and how the abandoned fetter comes to not rise again in the future.

<!-- @segment mn10:41.1 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally …

<!-- @segment mn10:41.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:41.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:41.4 -->

That’s how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles with respect to the six interior and exterior sense fields.

<!-- @segment mn10:41.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:42.0 -->

4.4. The Awakening Factors

<!-- @segment mn10:42.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles with respect to the seven awakening factors.

<!-- @segment mn10:42.2 -->

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to the seven awakening factors?

<!-- @segment mn10:42.3 -->

It’s when a mendicant who has the awakening factor of mindfulness in them understands: ‘I have the awakening factor of mindfulness in me.’ When they don’t have the awakening factor of mindfulness in them, they understand: ‘I don’t have the awakening factor of mindfulness in me.’ They understand how the awakening factor of mindfulness that has not arisen comes to arise; and how the awakening factor of mindfulness that has arisen becomes fulfilled by development.

<!-- @segment mn10:42.4 -->

When they have the awakening factor of investigation of principles …

<!-- @segment mn10:42.5 -->

energy …

<!-- @segment mn10:42.6 -->

rapture …

<!-- @segment mn10:42.7 -->

tranquility …

<!-- @segment mn10:42.8 -->

immersion …

<!-- @segment mn10:42.9 -->

equanimity in them, they understand: ‘I have the awakening factor of equanimity in me.’ When they don’t have the awakening factor of equanimity in them, they understand: ‘I don’t have the awakening factor of equanimity in me.’ They understand how the awakening factor of equanimity that has not arisen comes to arise; and how the awakening factor of equanimity that has arisen becomes fulfilled by development.

<!-- @segment mn10:43.1 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally, externally, and both internally and externally.

<!-- @segment mn10:43.2 -->

They meditate observing, with respect to the principles, the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish.

<!-- @segment mn10:43.3 -->

Or mindfulness is established that principles exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment mn10:43.4 -->

That’s how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles with respect to the seven awakening factors.

<!-- @segment mn10:43.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:44.0 -->

4.5. The Truths

<!-- @segment mn10:44.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles with respect to the four noble truths.

<!-- @segment mn10:44.2 -->

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to the four noble truths?

<!-- @segment mn10:44.3 -->

It’s when a mendicant truly understands: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.’

<!-- @segment mn10:45.1 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally, externally, and both internally and externally.

<!-- @segment mn10:45.2 -->

They meditate observing, with respect to the principles, the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish.

<!-- @segment mn10:45.3 -->

Or mindfulness is established that principles exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment mn10:45.4 -->

That’s how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles with respect to the four noble truths.

<!-- @segment mn10:45.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:45.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:46.1 -->

Anyone who develops these four kinds of mindfulness meditation in this way for seven years can expect one of two results:

<!-- @segment mn10:46.2 -->

enlightenment in this very life, or if there’s residue left behind, non-return.

<!-- @segment mn10:46.3 -->

Let alone seven years,

<!-- @segment mn10:46.4 -->

anyone who develops these four kinds of mindfulness meditation in this way for six years …

<!-- @segment mn10:46.5 -->

five years …

<!-- @segment mn10:46.6 -->

four years …

<!-- @segment mn10:46.7 -->

three years …

<!-- @segment mn10:46.8 -->

two years …

<!-- @segment mn10:46.9 -->

one year …

<!-- @segment mn10:46.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:46.11 -->

seven months …

<!-- @segment mn10:46.12 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:46.13 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:46.14 -->

six months …

<!-- @segment mn10:46.15 -->

five months …

<!-- @segment mn10:46.16 -->

four months …

<!-- @segment mn10:46.17 -->

three months …

<!-- @segment mn10:46.18 -->

two months …

<!-- @segment mn10:46.19 -->

one month …

<!-- @segment mn10:46.20 -->

a fortnight …

<!-- @segment mn10:46.21 -->

Let alone a fortnight,

<!-- @segment mn10:46.22 -->

anyone who develops these four kinds of mindfulness meditation in this way for seven days can expect one of two results:

<!-- @segment mn10:46.23 -->

enlightenment in this very life, or if there’s residue left behind, non-return.

<!-- @segment mn10:47.1 -->

‘The four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to convergence. They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment.’

<!-- @segment mn10:47.2 -->

That’s what I said, and this is why I said it.”

<!-- @segment mn10:47.3 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn10:47.4 -->

Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn10:47.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:47.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:48.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:48.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn10:48.3 -->
