---
slug: mn11
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Shorter Discourse on the Lion’s Roar
---

<!-- @segment mn11:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn11:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment mn11:1.3 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,

<!-- @segment mn11:1.4 -->

“Mendicants!”

<!-- @segment mn11:1.5 -->

“Venerable sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment mn11:1.6 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment mn11:2.1 -->

“‘Only here is there a true ascetic, here a second ascetic, here a third ascetic, and here a fourth ascetic.

<!-- @segment mn11:2.2 -->

Other sects are empty of ascetics.’

<!-- @segment mn11:2.3 -->

This, mendicants, is how you should rightly roar your lion’s roar.

<!-- @segment mn11:3.1 -->

It’s possible that wanderers of other religions might say:

<!-- @segment mn11:3.2 -->

‘But what is the source of the venerables’ certainty and forcefulness that they say this?’

<!-- @segment mn11:3.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn11:3.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn11:3.5 -->

You should say to them:

<!-- @segment mn11:3.6 -->

‘There are four things explained by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. Seeing these things in ourselves we say that:

<!-- @segment mn11:3.7 -->

“Only here is there a true ascetic, here a second ascetic, here a third ascetic, and here a fourth ascetic.

<!-- @segment mn11:3.8 -->

Other sects are empty of ascetics.”

<!-- @segment mn11:3.9 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment mn11:3.10 -->

We have confidence in the Teacher, we have confidence in the teaching, and we have fulfilled the precepts.

<!-- @segment mn11:3.11 -->

And we have love and affection for those who share our path,

<!-- @segment mn11:3.12 -->

both laypeople and renunciates.

<!-- @segment mn11:3.13 -->

These are the four things.’

<!-- @segment mn11:3.14 -->



<!-- @segment mn11:3.15 -->



<!-- @segment mn11:4.1 -->

It’s possible that wanderers of other religions might say:

<!-- @segment mn11:4.2 -->

‘We too have confidence in the Teacher—our Teacher; we have confidence in the teaching—our teaching; and we have fulfilled the precepts—our precepts.

<!-- @segment mn11:4.3 -->

And we have love and affection for those who share our path,

<!-- @segment mn11:4.4 -->

both laypeople and renunciates.

<!-- @segment mn11:4.5 -->

What, then, is the difference between you and us?’

<!-- @segment mn11:5.1 -->

You should say to them:

<!-- @segment mn11:5.2 -->

‘Well, reverends, is the goal one or many?’

<!-- @segment mn11:5.3 -->

Answering rightly, the wanderers would say:

<!-- @segment mn11:5.4 -->

‘The goal is one, reverends, not many.’

<!-- @segment mn11:5.5 -->

‘But is that goal for the greedy or for those free of greed?’

<!-- @segment mn11:5.6 -->

Answering rightly, the wanderers would say:

<!-- @segment mn11:5.7 -->

‘That goal is for those free of greed, not for the greedy.’

<!-- @segment mn11:5.8 -->

‘Is it for the hateful or those free of hate?’

<!-- @segment mn11:5.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn11:5.10 -->

‘It’s for those free of hate.’

<!-- @segment mn11:5.11 -->

‘Is it for the delusional or those free of delusion?’

<!-- @segment mn11:5.12 -->



<!-- @segment mn11:5.13 -->

‘It’s for those free of delusion.’

<!-- @segment mn11:5.14 -->

‘Is it for those who crave or those rid of craving?’

<!-- @segment mn11:5.15 -->



<!-- @segment mn11:5.16 -->

‘It’s for those rid of craving.’

<!-- @segment mn11:5.17 -->

‘Is it for those who have fuel for grasping or those who do not?’

<!-- @segment mn11:5.18 -->



<!-- @segment mn11:5.19 -->

‘It’s for those who do not have fuel for grasping.’

<!-- @segment mn11:5.20 -->

‘Is it for the knowledgeable or the ignorant?’

<!-- @segment mn11:5.21 -->



<!-- @segment mn11:5.22 -->

‘It’s for the knowledgeable.’

<!-- @segment mn11:5.23 -->

‘Is it for those who favor and oppose or for those who don’t favor and oppose?’

<!-- @segment mn11:5.24 -->



<!-- @segment mn11:5.25 -->

‘It’s for those who don’t favor and oppose.’

<!-- @segment mn11:5.26 -->

‘But is that goal for those who enjoy proliferation or for those who enjoy non-proliferation?’

<!-- @segment mn11:5.27 -->

Answering rightly, the wanderers would say:

<!-- @segment mn11:5.28 -->

‘It’s for those who enjoy non-proliferation, not for those who enjoy proliferation.’

<!-- @segment mn11:6.1 -->

Mendicants, there are these two views:

<!-- @segment mn11:6.2 -->

views favoring existence and views favoring nonexistence.

<!-- @segment mn11:6.3 -->

Any ascetics or brahmins who resort to, draw near to, and cling to a view favoring existence will oppose a view favoring nonexistence.

<!-- @segment mn11:6.4 -->

Any ascetics or brahmins who resort to, draw near to, and cling to a view favoring nonexistence will oppose a view favoring existence.

<!-- @segment mn11:7.1 -->

There are some ascetics and brahmins who don’t truly understand these two views’ origin, disappearance, gratification, drawback, and escape. They’re greedy, hateful, delusional, craving, grasping, and ignorant. They favor and oppose, and they enjoy proliferation.

<!-- @segment mn11:7.2 -->

They’re not freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

<!-- @segment mn11:7.3 -->

They’re not freed from suffering, I say.

<!-- @segment mn11:8.1 -->

There are some ascetics and brahmins who do truly understand these two views’ origin, disappearance, gratification, drawback, and escape. They’re rid of greed, hate, delusion, craving, grasping, and ignorance. They don’t favor and oppose, and they enjoy non-proliferation.

<!-- @segment mn11:8.2 -->

They’re freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

<!-- @segment mn11:8.3 -->

They’re freed from suffering, I say.

<!-- @segment mn11:9.1 -->

There are these four kinds of grasping.

<!-- @segment mn11:9.2 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment mn11:9.3 -->

Grasping at sensual pleasures, views, precepts and observances, and theories of a self.

<!-- @segment mn11:10.1 -->

There are some ascetics and brahmins who claim to propound the complete understanding of all kinds of grasping.

<!-- @segment mn11:10.2 -->

But they don’t correctly describe the complete understanding of all kinds of grasping.

<!-- @segment mn11:10.3 -->

They describe the complete understanding of grasping at sensual pleasures, but not views, precepts and observances, and theories of a self.

<!-- @segment mn11:10.4 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment mn11:10.5 -->

Because those gentlemen don’t truly understand these three things.

<!-- @segment mn11:10.6 -->

That’s why they claim to propound the complete understanding of all kinds of grasping,

<!-- @segment mn11:10.7 -->

but they don’t really.

<!-- @segment mn11:10.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn11:11.1 -->

There are some other ascetics and brahmins who claim to propound the complete understanding of all kinds of grasping,

<!-- @segment mn11:11.2 -->

but they don’t really.

<!-- @segment mn11:11.3 -->

They describe the complete understanding of grasping at sensual pleasures and views, but not precepts and observances, and theories of a self.

<!-- @segment mn11:11.4 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment mn11:11.5 -->

Because those gentlemen don’t truly understand these two things.

<!-- @segment mn11:11.6 -->

That’s why they claim to propound the complete understanding of all kinds of grasping,

<!-- @segment mn11:11.7 -->

but they don’t really.

<!-- @segment mn11:11.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn11:12.1 -->

There are some other ascetics and brahmins who claim to propound the complete understanding of all kinds of grasping,

<!-- @segment mn11:12.2 -->

but they don’t really.

<!-- @segment mn11:12.3 -->

They describe the complete understanding of grasping at sensual pleasures, views, and precepts and observances, but not theories of a self.

<!-- @segment mn11:12.4 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment mn11:12.5 -->

Because those gentlemen don’t truly understand this one thing.

<!-- @segment mn11:12.6 -->

That’s why they claim to propound the complete understanding of all kinds of grasping,

<!-- @segment mn11:12.7 -->

but they don’t really.

<!-- @segment mn11:12.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn11:13.1 -->

In such a teaching and training, confidence in the Teacher is said to be not rightly placed.

<!-- @segment mn11:13.2 -->

Likewise, confidence in the teaching,

<!-- @segment mn11:13.3 -->

fulfillment of the precepts,

<!-- @segment mn11:13.4 -->

and love and affection for those sharing the same path are said to be not rightly placed.

<!-- @segment mn11:13.5 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment mn11:13.6 -->

It’s because that teaching and training is poorly explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn11:14.1 -->

The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha claims to propound the complete understanding of all kinds of grasping.

<!-- @segment mn11:14.2 -->

He describes the complete understanding of grasping at sensual pleasures, views, precepts and observances, and theories of a self.

<!-- @segment mn11:15.1 -->

In such a teaching and training, confidence in the Teacher is said to be rightly placed.

<!-- @segment mn11:15.2 -->

Likewise, confidence in the teaching,

<!-- @segment mn11:15.3 -->

fulfillment of the precepts,

<!-- @segment mn11:15.4 -->

and love and affection for those sharing the same path are said to be rightly placed.

<!-- @segment mn11:15.5 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment mn11:15.6 -->

It’s because that teaching and training is well explained and well propounded, emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by a fully awakened Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn11:16.1 -->

What is the source, origin, birthplace, and inception of these four kinds of grasping?

<!-- @segment mn11:16.2 -->

Craving.

<!-- @segment mn11:16.3 -->

And what is the source, origin, birthplace, and inception of craving?

<!-- @segment mn11:16.4 -->

Feeling.

<!-- @segment mn11:16.5 -->

And what is the source of feeling?

<!-- @segment mn11:16.6 -->

Contact.

<!-- @segment mn11:16.7 -->

And what is the source of contact?

<!-- @segment mn11:16.8 -->

The six sense fields.

<!-- @segment mn11:16.9 -->

And what is the source of the six sense fields?

<!-- @segment mn11:16.10 -->

Name and form.

<!-- @segment mn11:16.11 -->

And what is the source of name and form?

<!-- @segment mn11:16.12 -->

Consciousness.

<!-- @segment mn11:16.13 -->

And what is the source of consciousness?

<!-- @segment mn11:16.14 -->

Choices.

<!-- @segment mn11:16.15 -->

And what is the source of choices?

<!-- @segment mn11:16.16 -->

Ignorance.

<!-- @segment mn11:17.1 -->

When that mendicant has given up ignorance and given rise to knowledge, with the fading away of ignorance and the arising of knowledge they don’t grasp at sensual pleasures, views, precepts and observances, or theories of a self.

<!-- @segment mn11:17.2 -->

Not grasping, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished.

<!-- @segment mn11:17.3 -->

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’”

<!-- @segment mn11:17.4 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn11:17.5 -->

Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said.
