---
slug: mn110
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Shorter Discourse on the Full-Moon Night
---

<!-- @segment mn110:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn110:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother in the Eastern Monastery.

<!-- @segment mn110:2.1 -->

Now, at that time it was the sabbath—the full moon on the fifteenth day—and the Buddha was sitting in the open surrounded by the Saṅgha of monks.

<!-- @segment mn110:2.2 -->

Then the Buddha looked around the Saṅgha of mendicants, who were so very silent. He addressed them,

<!-- @segment mn110:3.1 -->

“Mendicants, could an untrue person know of an untrue person:

<!-- @segment mn110:3.2 -->

‘This worthy one is an untrue person’?”

<!-- @segment mn110:3.3 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment mn110:3.4 -->

“Good, mendicants!

<!-- @segment mn110:3.5 -->

It’s impossible, it can’t happen, that an untrue person could know of an untrue person:

<!-- @segment mn110:3.6 -->

‘This worthy one is an untrue person.’

<!-- @segment mn110:3.7 -->

But could an untrue person know of a true person:

<!-- @segment mn110:3.8 -->

‘This worthy one is a true person’?”

<!-- @segment mn110:3.9 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment mn110:3.10 -->

“Good, mendicants!

<!-- @segment mn110:3.11 -->

That too is impossible.

<!-- @segment mn110:3.12 -->



<!-- @segment mn110:4.1 -->

An untrue person has bad qualities, is devoted to untrue persons, and has the intentions, counsel, speech, actions, views, and giving of an untrue person.

<!-- @segment mn110:5.1 -->

And how does an untrue person have bad qualities?

<!-- @segment mn110:5.2 -->

It’s when an untrue person is faithless, shameless, imprudent, unlearned, lazy, unmindful, and witless.

<!-- @segment mn110:5.3 -->

That’s how an untrue person has bad qualities.

<!-- @segment mn110:6.1 -->

And how is an untrue person devoted to untrue persons?

<!-- @segment mn110:6.2 -->

It’s when an untrue person is a friend and companion of ascetics and brahmins who are faithless, shameless, imprudent, unlearned, lazy, unmindful, and witless.

<!-- @segment mn110:6.3 -->

That’s how an untrue person is devoted to untrue persons.

<!-- @segment mn110:7.1 -->

And how does an untrue person have the intentions of an untrue person?

<!-- @segment mn110:7.2 -->

It’s when an untrue person intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both.

<!-- @segment mn110:7.3 -->

That’s how an untrue person has the intentions of an untrue person.

<!-- @segment mn110:8.1 -->

And how does an untrue person offer the counsel of an untrue person?

<!-- @segment mn110:8.2 -->

It’s when an untrue person offers counsel that hurts themselves, hurts others, and hurts both.

<!-- @segment mn110:8.3 -->

That’s how an untrue person offers the counsel of an untrue person.

<!-- @segment mn110:9.1 -->

And how does an untrue person have the speech of an untrue person?

<!-- @segment mn110:9.2 -->

It’s when an untrue person uses speech that’s false, backbiting, harsh, and nonsensical.

<!-- @segment mn110:9.3 -->

That’s how an untrue person has the speech of an untrue person.

<!-- @segment mn110:10.1 -->

And how does an untrue person have the action of an untrue person?

<!-- @segment mn110:10.2 -->

It’s when an untrue person kills living creatures, steals, and commits sexual misconduct.

<!-- @segment mn110:10.3 -->

That’s how an untrue person has the actions of an untrue person.

<!-- @segment mn110:11.1 -->

And how does an untrue person have the view of an untrue person?

<!-- @segment mn110:11.2 -->

It’s when an untrue person has such a view:

<!-- @segment mn110:11.3 -->

‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There’s no such thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’

<!-- @segment mn110:11.4 -->

That’s how an untrue person has the view of an untrue person.

<!-- @segment mn110:12.1 -->

And how does an untrue person give the gifts of an untrue person?

<!-- @segment mn110:12.2 -->

It’s when an untrue person gives a gift carelessly, not with their own hand, and thoughtlessly. They give the dregs, and they give without consideration for consequences.

<!-- @segment mn110:12.3 -->

That’s how an untrue person gives the gifts of an untrue person.

<!-- @segment mn110:13.1 -->

That untrue person—who has such bad qualities, is devoted to untrue persons, and has the intentions, counsel, speech, actions, views, and giving of an untrue person—

<!-- @segment mn110:13.2 -->

when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the place where untrue persons are reborn.

<!-- @segment mn110:13.3 -->

And what is the place where untrue persons are reborn?

<!-- @segment mn110:13.4 -->

Hell or the animal realm.

<!-- @segment mn110:14.1 -->

Mendicants, could a true person know of a true person:

<!-- @segment mn110:14.2 -->

‘This worthy one is a true person’?”

<!-- @segment mn110:14.3 -->

“Yes, sir.”

<!-- @segment mn110:14.4 -->

“Good, mendicants!

<!-- @segment mn110:14.5 -->

It is possible that a true person could know of a true person:

<!-- @segment mn110:14.6 -->

‘This worthy one is a true person.’

<!-- @segment mn110:14.7 -->

But could a true person know of an untrue person:

<!-- @segment mn110:14.8 -->

‘This worthy one is an untrue person’?”

<!-- @segment mn110:14.9 -->

“Yes, sir.”

<!-- @segment mn110:15.1 -->

“Good, mendicants!

<!-- @segment mn110:15.2 -->

That too is possible.

<!-- @segment mn110:15.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn110:15.4 -->

A true person has good qualities, is devoted to true persons, and has the intentions, counsel, speech, actions, views, and giving of a true person.

<!-- @segment mn110:15.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn110:16.1 -->

And how does a true person have good qualities?

<!-- @segment mn110:16.2 -->

It’s when a true person is faithful, conscientious, prudent, learned, energetic, mindful, and wise.

<!-- @segment mn110:16.3 -->

That’s how a true person has good qualities.

<!-- @segment mn110:17.1 -->

And how is a true person devoted to true persons?

<!-- @segment mn110:17.2 -->

It’s when a true person is a friend and companion of ascetics and brahmins who are faithful, conscientious, prudent, learned, energetic, mindful, and wise.

<!-- @segment mn110:17.3 -->

That’s how a true person is devoted to true persons.

<!-- @segment mn110:18.1 -->

And how does a true person have the intentions of a true person?

<!-- @segment mn110:18.2 -->

It’s when a true person doesn’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both.

<!-- @segment mn110:18.3 -->

That’s how a true person has the intentions of a true person.

<!-- @segment mn110:19.1 -->

And how does a true person offer the counsel of a true person?

<!-- @segment mn110:19.2 -->

It’s when a true person offers counsel that doesn’t hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both.

<!-- @segment mn110:19.3 -->

That’s how a true person offers the counsel of a true person.

<!-- @segment mn110:20.1 -->

And how does a true person have the speech of a true person?

<!-- @segment mn110:20.2 -->

It’s when a true person refrains from speech that’s false, backbiting, harsh, or nonsensical.

<!-- @segment mn110:20.3 -->

That’s how a true person has the speech of a true person.

<!-- @segment mn110:21.1 -->

And how does a true person have the action of a true person?

<!-- @segment mn110:21.2 -->

It’s when a true person refrains from killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct.

<!-- @segment mn110:21.3 -->

That’s how a true person has the action of a true person.

<!-- @segment mn110:22.1 -->

And how does a true person have the view of a true person?

<!-- @segment mn110:22.2 -->

It’s when a true person has such a view:

<!-- @segment mn110:22.3 -->

‘There is meaning in giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’

<!-- @segment mn110:22.4 -->

That’s how a true person has the view of a true person.

<!-- @segment mn110:23.1 -->

And how does a true person give the gifts of a true person?

<!-- @segment mn110:23.2 -->

It’s when a true person gives a gift carefully, with their own hand, and thoughtfully. They don’t give the dregs, and they give with consideration for consequences.

<!-- @segment mn110:23.3 -->

That’s how a true person gives the gifts of a true person.

<!-- @segment mn110:24.1 -->

That true person—who has such good qualities, is devoted to true persons, and has the intentions, counsel, speech, actions, views, and giving of a true person—

<!-- @segment mn110:24.2 -->

when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the place where true persons are reborn.

<!-- @segment mn110:24.3 -->

And what is the place where true persons are reborn?

<!-- @segment mn110:24.4 -->

A state of greatness among gods or humans.”

<!-- @segment mn110:25.1 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn110:25.2 -->

Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn110:25.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn110:25.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn110:26.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn110:26.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn110:26.3 -->
