---
slug: mn112
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Sixfold Purification
---

<!-- @segment mn112:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn112:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment mn112:1.3 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,

<!-- @segment mn112:1.4 -->

“Mendicants!”

<!-- @segment mn112:1.5 -->

“Venerable sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment mn112:1.6 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment mn112:2.1 -->

“Take a mendicant who declares enlightenment:

<!-- @segment mn112:2.2 -->

‘I understand: “Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.”’

<!-- @segment mn112:3.1 -->

You should neither approve nor reject that mendicant’s statement.

<!-- @segment mn112:3.2 -->

Rather, you should question them:

<!-- @segment mn112:3.3 -->

‘Reverend, these four kinds of expression have been rightly explained by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn112:3.4 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment mn112:3.5 -->

Saying you’ve seen, heard, thought, or known something, and you have.

<!-- @segment mn112:3.6 -->

These are the four kinds of expression rightly explained by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn112:3.7 -->

How does the venerable know and see regarding these four kinds of expression so that your mind is freed from defilements by not grasping?’

<!-- @segment mn112:4.1 -->

For a mendicant with defilements ended—who has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their heart’s goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment—it is in line with the teaching to answer:

<!-- @segment mn112:4.2 -->

‘Regarding what is seen, reverends, I live without getting involved or shying away, independent, untied, liberated, detached, with mind free of boundaries.

<!-- @segment mn112:4.3 -->

Regarding what is heard …

<!-- @segment mn112:4.4 -->

thought …

<!-- @segment mn112:4.5 -->

or known, I live without getting involved or shying away, independent, untied, liberated, detached, with mind free of boundaries.

<!-- @segment mn112:4.6 -->

That is how I know and see regarding these four kinds of expression so that my mind is freed from defilements by not grasping.’

<!-- @segment mn112:5.1 -->

Saying ‘Good!’ you should applaud and cheer that mendicant’s statement,

<!-- @segment mn112:5.2 -->

then ask a further question:

<!-- @segment mn112:5.3 -->

‘Reverend, these five grasping aggregates have been rightly explained by the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn112:5.4 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment mn112:5.5 -->

That is: the grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

<!-- @segment mn112:5.6 -->

These are the five grasping aggregates that have been rightly explained by the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn112:5.7 -->

How does the venerable know and see regarding these five grasping aggregates so that your mind is freed from defilements by not grasping?’

<!-- @segment mn112:6.1 -->

For a mendicant with defilements ended it is in line with the teaching to answer:

<!-- @segment mn112:6.2 -->

‘Reverends, knowing that form is powerless, faded, and unreliable, I understand that my mind is freed through the ending, fading away, cessation, giving away, and letting go of attraction, grasping, mental fixation, insistence, and underlying tendency for form.

<!-- @segment mn112:6.3 -->

Knowing that feeling …

<!-- @segment mn112:6.4 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment mn112:6.5 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment mn112:6.6 -->

consciousness is powerless, faded, and unreliable, I understand that my mind is freed through the ending, fading away, cessation, giving away, and letting go of attraction, grasping, mental fixation, insistence, and underlying tendency for consciousness.

<!-- @segment mn112:6.7 -->

That is how I know and see regarding these five grasping aggregates so that my mind is freed from defilements by not grasping.’

<!-- @segment mn112:7.1 -->

Saying ‘Good!’ you should applaud and cheer that mendicant’s statement,

<!-- @segment mn112:7.2 -->

then ask a further question:

<!-- @segment mn112:7.3 -->

‘Reverend, these six elements have been rightly explained by the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn112:7.4 -->

What six?

<!-- @segment mn112:7.5 -->

The elements of earth, water, fire, air, space, and consciousness.

<!-- @segment mn112:7.6 -->

These are the six elements that have been rightly explained by the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn112:7.7 -->

How does the venerable know and see regarding these six elements so that your mind is freed from defilements by not grasping?’

<!-- @segment mn112:8.1 -->

For a mendicant with defilements ended it is in line with the teaching to answer:

<!-- @segment mn112:8.2 -->

‘Reverends, I’ve not taken the earth element as self, nor is there a self based on the earth element.

<!-- @segment mn112:8.3 -->

And I understand that my mind is freed through the ending, fading away, cessation, giving away, and letting go of attraction, grasping, mental fixation, insistence, and underlying tendency based on the earth element.

<!-- @segment mn112:8.4 -->

I’ve not taken the water element …

<!-- @segment mn112:8.5 -->

fire element …

<!-- @segment mn112:8.6 -->

air element …

<!-- @segment mn112:8.7 -->

space element …

<!-- @segment mn112:8.8 -->

consciousness element as self, nor is there a self based on the consciousness element.

<!-- @segment mn112:8.9 -->

And I understand that my mind is freed through the ending of attraction based on the consciousness element.

<!-- @segment mn112:8.10 -->

That is how I know and see regarding these six elements so that my mind is freed from defilements by not grasping.’

<!-- @segment mn112:9.1 -->

Saying ‘Good!’ you should applaud and cheer that mendicant’s statement,

<!-- @segment mn112:9.2 -->

then ask a further question:

<!-- @segment mn112:9.3 -->

‘Reverend, these six interior and exterior sense fields have been rightly explained by the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn112:9.4 -->

What six?

<!-- @segment mn112:9.5 -->

The eye and sights, the ear and sounds, the nose and smells, the tongue and tastes, the body and touches, and the mind and ideas.

<!-- @segment mn112:9.6 -->

These are the six interior and exterior sense fields that have been rightly explained by the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn112:9.7 -->

How does the venerable know and see regarding these six interior and exterior sense fields so that your mind is freed from defilements by not grasping?’

<!-- @segment mn112:10.1 -->

For a mendicant with defilements ended it is in line with the teaching to answer:

<!-- @segment mn112:10.2 -->

‘I understand that my mind is freed through the ending, fading away, cessation, giving away, and letting go of desire and greed and relishing and craving; attraction, grasping, mental fixation, insistence, and underlying tendency for the eye, sights, eye consciousness, and things knowable by eye consciousness.

<!-- @segment mn112:10.3 -->

I understand that my mind is freed through the ending of desire for the ear …

<!-- @segment mn112:10.4 -->

nose …

<!-- @segment mn112:10.5 -->

tongue …

<!-- @segment mn112:10.6 -->

body …

<!-- @segment mn112:10.7 -->

mind, ideas, mind consciousness, and things knowable by mind consciousness.

<!-- @segment mn112:10.8 -->

That is how I know and see regarding these six interior and exterior sense fields so that my mind is freed from defilements by not grasping.’

<!-- @segment mn112:11.1 -->

Saying ‘Good!’ you should applaud and cheer that mendicant’s statement,

<!-- @segment mn112:11.2 -->

then ask a further question:

<!-- @segment mn112:11.3 -->

‘Sir, how does the venerable know and see so that he has eradicated I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body and externally for all signs?’

<!-- @segment mn112:12.1 -->

For a mendicant with defilements ended it is in line with the teaching to answer:

<!-- @segment mn112:12.2 -->

‘Formerly, reverends, when I was still a layperson, I was ignorant.

<!-- @segment mn112:12.3 -->

Then the Realized One or one of his disciples taught me the Dhamma.

<!-- @segment mn112:12.4 -->

I gained faith in the Realized One,

<!-- @segment mn112:12.5 -->

and reflected:

<!-- @segment mn112:12.6 -->

“Life at home is cramped and dirty, life gone forth is wide open.

<!-- @segment mn112:12.7 -->

It’s not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell.

<!-- @segment mn112:12.8 -->

Why don’t I shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from lay life to homelessness?”

<!-- @segment mn112:13.1 -->

After some time I gave up a large or small fortune, and a large or small family circle. I shaved off hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and went forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment mn112:13.2 -->

Once I had gone forth, I took up the training and livelihood of the mendicants. I gave up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. I was scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for all living beings.

<!-- @segment mn112:13.3 -->

I gave up stealing. I took only what’s given, and expected only what’s given. I kept myself clean by not thieving.

<!-- @segment mn112:13.4 -->

I gave up unchastity. I became chaste, set apart, avoiding the vulgar act of sex.

<!-- @segment mn112:13.5 -->

I gave up lying. I spoke the truth and stuck to the truth. I was honest and dependable, not tricking the world with my words.

<!-- @segment mn112:13.6 -->

I gave up backbiting. I didn’t repeat in one place what I heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead, I reconciled those who are divided and support those who are united, delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony.

<!-- @segment mn112:13.7 -->

I gave up harsh speech. I spoke in a way that’s mellow, pleasing to the ear, endearing, going to the heart, polite, likable and agreeable to the people.

<!-- @segment mn112:13.8 -->

I gave up talking nonsense. My words were timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. I said things at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.

<!-- @segment mn112:14.1 -->

I refrained from injuring plants and seeds. I ate in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night and food at the wrong time.

<!-- @segment mn112:14.2 -->

I refrained from seeing shows of dancing, singing, and music .

<!-- @segment mn112:14.3 -->

I refrained from attiring and adorning myself with garlands, fragrance, and makeup.

<!-- @segment mn112:14.4 -->

I refrained from high and luxurious beds.

<!-- @segment mn112:14.5 -->

I refrained from receiving gold and currency,

<!-- @segment mn112:14.6 -->

raw grains,

<!-- @segment mn112:14.7 -->

raw meat,

<!-- @segment mn112:14.8 -->

women and girls,

<!-- @segment mn112:14.9 -->

male and female bondservants,

<!-- @segment mn112:14.10 -->

goats and sheep,

<!-- @segment mn112:14.11 -->

chicken and pigs,

<!-- @segment mn112:14.12 -->

elephants, cows, horses, and mares,

<!-- @segment mn112:14.13 -->

and fields and land.

<!-- @segment mn112:14.14 -->

I refrained from running errands and messages;

<!-- @segment mn112:14.15 -->

buying and selling;

<!-- @segment mn112:14.16 -->

falsifying weights, metals, or measures;

<!-- @segment mn112:14.17 -->

bribery, fraud, cheating, and duplicity;

<!-- @segment mn112:14.18 -->

mutilation, murder, abduction, banditry, plunder, and violence.

<!-- @segment mn112:14.19 -->

I became content with robes to look after the body and almsfood to look after the belly. Wherever I went, I set out taking only these things.

<!-- @segment mn112:14.20 -->

Like a bird: wherever it flies, wings are its only burden.

<!-- @segment mn112:14.21 -->

In the same way, I became content with robes to look after the body and almsfood to look after the belly. Wherever I went, I set out taking only these things.

<!-- @segment mn112:14.22 -->

When I had this entire spectrum of noble ethics, I experienced a blameless happiness inside myself.

<!-- @segment mn112:15.1 -->

When I saw a sight with my eyes, I didn’t get caught up in the features and details.

<!-- @segment mn112:15.2 -->

If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, I practiced restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint.

<!-- @segment mn112:15.3 -->

When I heard a sound with my ears …

<!-- @segment mn112:15.4 -->

When I smelled an odor with my nose …

<!-- @segment mn112:15.5 -->

When I tasted a flavor with my tongue …

<!-- @segment mn112:15.6 -->

When I felt a touch with my body …

<!-- @segment mn112:15.7 -->

When I knew an idea with my mind, I didn’t get caught up in the features and details.

<!-- @segment mn112:15.8 -->

If the faculty of the mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, I practiced restraint, protecting the faculty of the mind, and achieving its restraint.

<!-- @segment mn112:15.9 -->

When I had this noble sense restraint, I experienced an unsullied bliss inside myself.

<!-- @segment mn112:16.1 -->

I acted with situational awareness when going out and coming back; when looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent.

<!-- @segment mn112:16.2 -->

When I had this entire spectrum of noble ethics, this noble contentment, this noble sense restraint, and this noble mindfulness and situational awareness,

<!-- @segment mn112:16.3 -->

I frequented a secluded lodging—a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw.

<!-- @segment mn112:16.4 -->

After the meal, I returned from almsround, sat down cross-legged, set my body straight, and brought mindfulness to the present.

<!-- @segment mn112:17.1 -->

Giving up covetousness for the world, I meditated with a heart rid of covetousness, cleansing the mind of covetousness.

<!-- @segment mn112:17.2 -->

Giving up ill will and malevolence, I meditated with a mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy for all living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will.

<!-- @segment mn112:17.3 -->

Giving up dullness and drowsiness, I meditated with a mind rid of dullness and drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of dullness and drowsiness.

<!-- @segment mn112:17.4 -->

Giving up restlessness and remorse, I meditated without restlessness, my mind peaceful inside, cleansing the mind of restlessness and remorse.

<!-- @segment mn112:17.5 -->

Giving up doubt, I meditated having gone beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful qualities, cleansing the mind of doubt.

<!-- @segment mn112:18.1 -->

I gave up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom.

<!-- @segment mn112:18.2 -->

Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, I entered and remained in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment mn112:18.3 -->

As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected were stilled, I entered and remained in the second absorption …

<!-- @segment mn112:18.4 -->

third absorption …

<!-- @segment mn112:18.5 -->

fourth absorption.

<!-- @segment mn112:19.1 -->

When my mind had immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—I extended it toward knowledge of the ending of defilements.

<!-- @segment mn112:19.2 -->

I truly understood: “This is suffering” … “This is the origin of suffering” … “This is the cessation of suffering” … “This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering”.

<!-- @segment mn112:19.3 -->

I truly understood: “These are defilements”… “This is the origin of defilements” … “This is the cessation of defilements” … “This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements”.

<!-- @segment mn112:20.1 -->

Knowing and seeing like this, my mind was freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance.

<!-- @segment mn112:20.2 -->

When it was freed, I knew it was freed.

<!-- @segment mn112:20.3 -->

I understood: “Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further for this place.”

<!-- @segment mn112:20.4 -->

That is how I know and see so that I have eradicated I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body and externally for all signs.’

<!-- @segment mn112:21.1 -->

Saying ‘Good!’ you should applaud and cheer that mendicant’s statement,

<!-- @segment mn112:21.2 -->

and then say to them:

<!-- @segment mn112:21.3 -->

‘We are fortunate, reverend, so very fortunate

<!-- @segment mn112:21.4 -->

to see a venerable such as yourself as one of our spiritual companions!’”

<!-- @segment mn112:21.5 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn112:21.6 -->

Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said.
