---
slug: mn115
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Many Elements
---

<!-- @segment mn115:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn115:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment mn115:1.3 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,

<!-- @segment mn115:1.4 -->

“Mendicants!”

<!-- @segment mn115:1.5 -->

“Venerable sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment mn115:1.6 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment mn115:2.1 -->

“Whatever dangers there are, all come from the foolish, not from the astute.

<!-- @segment mn115:2.2 -->

Whatever perils there are, all come from the foolish, not from the astute.

<!-- @segment mn115:2.3 -->

Whatever hazards there are, all come from the foolish, not from the astute.

<!-- @segment mn115:2.4 -->

It’s like a fire that spreads from a hut made of reeds or grass, and burns down even a bungalow, plastered inside and out, draft-free, with doors fastened and windows shuttered.

<!-- @segment mn115:2.5 -->

In the same way, whatever dangers there are, all come from the foolish, not from the astute.

<!-- @segment mn115:2.6 -->

Whatever perils there are, all come from the foolish, not from the astute.

<!-- @segment mn115:2.7 -->

Whatever hazards there are, all come from the foolish, not from the astute.

<!-- @segment mn115:2.8 -->

So, the fool is dangerous, but the astute person is safe.

<!-- @segment mn115:2.9 -->

The fool is perilous, but the astute person is not.

<!-- @segment mn115:2.10 -->

The fool is hazardous, but the astute person is not.

<!-- @segment mn115:2.11 -->

There’s no danger, peril, or hazard that comes from the astute.

<!-- @segment mn115:2.12 -->

So you should train like this: ‘We shall be astute, we shall be inquirers.’”

<!-- @segment mn115:2.13 -->



<!-- @segment mn115:3.1 -->

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn115:3.2 -->

“Sir, how is a mendicant qualified to be called ‘astute, an inquirer’?”

<!-- @segment mn115:3.3 -->

“Ānanda, it’s when a mendicant is skilled in the elements, in the sense fields, in dependent origination, and in the possible and the impossible.

<!-- @segment mn115:3.4 -->

That’s how a mendicant is qualified to be called ‘astute, an inquirer’.”

<!-- @segment mn115:4.1 -->

“But sir, how is a mendicant qualified to be called ‘skilled in the elements’?”

<!-- @segment mn115:4.2 -->

“There are, Ānanda, these eighteen elements.

<!-- @segment mn115:4.3 -->

The eye element, sight element, and eye consciousness element.

<!-- @segment mn115:4.4 -->

The ear element, sound element, and ear consciousness element.

<!-- @segment mn115:4.5 -->

The nose element, smell element, and nose consciousness element.

<!-- @segment mn115:4.6 -->

The tongue element, taste element, and tongue consciousness element.

<!-- @segment mn115:4.7 -->

The body element, touch element, and body consciousness element.

<!-- @segment mn115:4.8 -->

The mind element, ideas element, and mind consciousness element.

<!-- @segment mn115:4.9 -->

When a mendicant knows and sees these eighteen elements,

<!-- @segment mn115:4.10 -->

they’re qualified to be called ‘skilled in the elements’.”

<!-- @segment mn115:5.1 -->

“But sir, could there be another way in which a mendicant is qualified to be called ‘skilled in the elements’?”

<!-- @segment mn115:5.2 -->

“There could, Ānanda.

<!-- @segment mn115:5.3 -->

There are these six elements:

<!-- @segment mn115:5.4 -->

the elements of earth, water, fire, air, space, and consciousness.

<!-- @segment mn115:5.5 -->

When a mendicant knows and sees these six elements,

<!-- @segment mn115:5.6 -->

they’re qualified to be called ‘skilled in the elements’.”

<!-- @segment mn115:6.1 -->

“But sir, could there be another way in which a mendicant is qualified to be called ‘skilled in the elements’?”

<!-- @segment mn115:6.2 -->

“There could, Ānanda.

<!-- @segment mn115:6.3 -->

There are these six elements:

<!-- @segment mn115:6.4 -->

the elements of pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, equanimity, and ignorance.

<!-- @segment mn115:6.5 -->

When a mendicant knows and sees these six elements,

<!-- @segment mn115:6.6 -->

they’re qualified to be called ‘skilled in the elements’.”

<!-- @segment mn115:7.1 -->

“But sir, could there be another way in which a mendicant is qualified to be called ‘skilled in the elements’?”

<!-- @segment mn115:7.2 -->

“There could, Ānanda.

<!-- @segment mn115:7.3 -->

There are these six elements:

<!-- @segment mn115:7.4 -->

the elements of sensuality and renunciation, malice and good will, and cruelty and harmlessness.

<!-- @segment mn115:7.5 -->

When a mendicant knows and sees these six elements,

<!-- @segment mn115:7.6 -->

they’re qualified to be called ‘skilled in the elements’.”

<!-- @segment mn115:8.1 -->

“But sir, could there be another way in which a mendicant is qualified to be called ‘skilled in the elements’?”

<!-- @segment mn115:8.2 -->

“There could, Ānanda.

<!-- @segment mn115:8.3 -->

There are these three elements:

<!-- @segment mn115:8.4 -->

the elements of the sensual realm, the realm of luminous form, and the formless realm.

<!-- @segment mn115:8.5 -->

When a mendicant knows and sees these three elements,

<!-- @segment mn115:8.6 -->

they’re qualified to be called ‘skilled in the elements’.”

<!-- @segment mn115:9.1 -->

“But sir, could there be another way in which a mendicant is qualified to be called ‘skilled in the elements’?”

<!-- @segment mn115:9.2 -->

“There could, Ānanda.

<!-- @segment mn115:9.3 -->

There are these two elements:

<!-- @segment mn115:9.4 -->

the conditioned element and the unconditioned element.

<!-- @segment mn115:9.5 -->

When a mendicant knows and sees these two elements,

<!-- @segment mn115:9.6 -->

they’re qualified to be called ‘skilled in the elements’.”

<!-- @segment mn115:10.1 -->

“But sir, how is a mendicant qualified to be called ‘skilled in the sense fields’?”

<!-- @segment mn115:10.2 -->

“There are these six interior and exterior sense fields:

<!-- @segment mn115:10.3 -->

the eye and sights, the ear and sounds, the nose and smells, the tongue and tastes, the body and touches, and the mind and ideas.

<!-- @segment mn115:10.4 -->

When a mendicant knows and sees these six interior and exterior sense fields,

<!-- @segment mn115:10.5 -->

they’re qualified to be called ‘skilled in the sense fields’.”

<!-- @segment mn115:11.1 -->

“But sir, how is a mendicant qualified to be called ‘skilled in dependent origination’?”

<!-- @segment mn115:11.2 -->

“It’s when a mendicant understands:

<!-- @segment mn115:11.3 -->

‘When this exists, this comes to be; due to the arising of this, this arises.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.4 -->

When this doesn’t exist, this doesn’t come to be; due to the cessation of this, this ceases. That is:

<!-- @segment mn115:11.5 -->

ignorance is a requirement for choices.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.6 -->

Choices are a requirement for consciousness.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.7 -->

Consciousness is a requirement for name and form.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.8 -->

Name and form are requirements for the six sense fields.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.9 -->

The six sense fields are requirements for contact.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.10 -->

Contact is a requirement for feeling.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.11 -->

Feeling is a requirement for craving.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.12 -->

Craving is a requirement for grasping.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.13 -->

Grasping is a requirement for continued existence.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.14 -->

Continued existence is a requirement for rebirth.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.15 -->

Rebirth is a requirement for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.16 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.17 -->

When ignorance fades away and ceases no residue left behind, choices cease.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.18 -->

When choices cease, consciousness ceases.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.19 -->

When consciousness ceases, name and form cease.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.20 -->

When name and form cease, the six sense fields cease.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.21 -->

When the six sense fields cease, contact ceases.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.22 -->

When contact ceases, feeling ceases.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.23 -->

When feeling ceases, craving ceases.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.24 -->

When craving ceases, grasping ceases.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.25 -->

When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.26 -->

When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.27 -->

When rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease.

<!-- @segment mn115:11.28 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.’

<!-- @segment mn115:11.29 -->

That’s how a mendicant is qualified to be called ‘skilled in dependent origination’.”

<!-- @segment mn115:12.1 -->

“But sir, how is a mendicant qualified to be called ‘skilled in the possible and impossible’?”

<!-- @segment mn115:12.2 -->

“It’s when a mendicant understands: ‘It’s impossible for an individual accomplished in view to take any condition as permanent. That is not possible.

<!-- @segment mn115:12.3 -->

But it’s possible for an ordinary person to take some condition as permanent. That is possible.’

<!-- @segment mn115:12.4 -->

They understand: ‘It’s impossible for an individual accomplished in view to take any condition as pleasant.

<!-- @segment mn115:12.5 -->

But it’s possible for an ordinary person to take some condition as pleasant.’

<!-- @segment mn115:12.6 -->

They understand: ‘It’s impossible for an individual accomplished in view to take anything as self.

<!-- @segment mn115:12.7 -->

But it’s possible for an ordinary person to take something as self.’

<!-- @segment mn115:13.1 -->

They understand: ‘It’s impossible for an individual accomplished in view to murder their mother.

<!-- @segment mn115:13.2 -->

But it’s possible for an ordinary person to murder their mother.’

<!-- @segment mn115:13.3 -->

They understand: ‘It’s impossible for an individual accomplished in view to murder their father … or murder a perfected one.

<!-- @segment mn115:13.4 -->

But it’s possible for an ordinary person to murder their father … or a perfected one.’

<!-- @segment mn115:13.5 -->

They understand: ‘It’s impossible for an individual accomplished in view to injure a Realized One with malicious intent.

<!-- @segment mn115:13.6 -->

But it’s possible for an ordinary person to injure a Realized One with malicious intent.’

<!-- @segment mn115:13.7 -->

They understand: ‘It’s impossible for an individual accomplished in view to cause a schism in the Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment mn115:13.8 -->

But it’s possible for an ordinary person to cause a schism in the Saṅgha.’

<!-- @segment mn115:13.9 -->

They understand: ‘It’s impossible for an individual accomplished in view to dedicate themselves to another teacher.

<!-- @segment mn115:13.10 -->

But it’s possible for an ordinary person to dedicate themselves to another teacher.’

<!-- @segment mn115:14.1 -->

They understand: ‘It’s impossible for two perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas to arise in the same solar system at the same time.

<!-- @segment mn115:14.2 -->

But it is possible for just one perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha, to arise in one solar system.’

<!-- @segment mn115:14.3 -->

They understand: ‘It’s impossible for two wheel-turning monarchs to arise in the same solar system at the same time.

<!-- @segment mn115:14.4 -->

But it is possible for just one wheel-turning monarch to arise in one solar system.’

<!-- @segment mn115:15.1 -->

They understand: ‘It’s impossible for a woman to be a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn115:15.2 -->

But it is possible for a man to be a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha.’

<!-- @segment mn115:15.3 -->

They understand: ‘It’s impossible for a woman to be a wheel-turning monarch.

<!-- @segment mn115:15.4 -->

But it is possible for a man to be a wheel-turning monarch.’

<!-- @segment mn115:15.5 -->

They understand: ‘It’s impossible for a woman to perform the role of Sakka, Māra, or the Divinity.

<!-- @segment mn115:15.6 -->

But it is possible for a man to perform the role of Sakka, Māra, or the Divinity.’

<!-- @segment mn115:16.1 -->

They understand: ‘It’s impossible for a likable, desirable, agreeable result to come from bad conduct of body, speech, and mind.

<!-- @segment mn115:16.2 -->

But it is possible for an unlikable, undesirable, disagreeable result to come from bad conduct of body, speech, and mind.’

<!-- @segment mn115:16.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn115:16.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn115:16.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn115:16.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn115:17.1 -->

They understand: ‘It’s impossible for an unlikable, undesirable, disagreeable result to come from good conduct of body, speech, and mind.

<!-- @segment mn115:17.2 -->

But it is possible for a likable, desirable, agreeable result to come from good conduct of body, speech, and mind.’

<!-- @segment mn115:17.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn115:17.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn115:17.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn115:17.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn115:18.1 -->

They understand: ‘It’s impossible that someone who has engaged in bad conduct of body, speech, and mind, could for that reason alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

<!-- @segment mn115:18.2 -->

But it is possible that someone who has engaged in bad conduct of body, speech, and mind could, for that reason alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.’

<!-- @segment mn115:19.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn115:19.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn115:19.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn115:19.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn115:19.5 -->

They understand: ‘It’s impossible that someone who has engaged in good conduct of body, speech, and mind could, for that reason alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.

<!-- @segment mn115:19.6 -->

But it is possible that someone who has engaged in good conduct of body, speech, and mind could, for that reason alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’

<!-- @segment mn115:19.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn115:19.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn115:19.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn115:19.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn115:19.11 -->

That’s how a mendicant is qualified to be called ‘skilled in the possible and impossible’.”

<!-- @segment mn115:20.1 -->

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn115:20.2 -->

“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing!

<!-- @segment mn115:20.3 -->

What is the name of this exposition of the teaching?”

<!-- @segment mn115:20.4 -->

“Well then, Ānanda, you may remember this exposition of the teaching as ‘The Many Elements’, or else ‘The Four Rounds’, or else ‘The Mirror of the Teaching’, or else ‘The Drum of Freedom From Death’, or else ‘The Supreme Victory in Battle’.”

<!-- @segment mn115:20.5 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn115:20.6 -->

Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what the Buddha said.
