---
slug: mn12
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Longer Discourse on the Lion’s Roar
---

<!-- @segment mn12:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn12:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying outside the city of Vesālī in a woodland grove west of the town.

<!-- @segment mn12:2.1 -->

Now at that time Sunakkhatta the Licchavi had recently left this teaching and training.

<!-- @segment mn12:2.2 -->

He was telling a crowd in Vesālī:

<!-- @segment mn12:2.3 -->

“The ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.

<!-- @segment mn12:2.4 -->

He teaches what he’s worked out by logic, following a line of inquiry, expressing his own perspective.

<!-- @segment mn12:2.5 -->

And his teaching leads those who practice it to the complete ending of suffering, the goal for which it’s taught.”

<!-- @segment mn12:3.1 -->

Then Venerable Sāriputta robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Vesālī for alms.

<!-- @segment mn12:3.2 -->

He heard what Sunakkhatta was saying.

<!-- @segment mn12:3.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:3.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:3.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:3.6 -->

Then he wandered for alms in Vesālī. After the meal, on his return from almsround, he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened.

<!-- @segment mn12:3.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:3.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:3.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:3.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:3.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:4.1 -->

“Sāriputta, Sunakkhatta, that futile man, is angry.

<!-- @segment mn12:4.2 -->

His words are spoken out of anger.

<!-- @segment mn12:4.3 -->

Thinking he criticizes the Realized One, in fact he just praises him.

<!-- @segment mn12:4.4 -->

For it is praise of the Realized One to say:

<!-- @segment mn12:4.5 -->

‘His teaching leads those who practice it to the complete ending of suffering, the goal for which it’s taught.’

<!-- @segment mn12:5.1 -->

But there’s no way Sunakkhatta will infer about me from the teaching:

<!-- @segment mn12:5.2 -->

‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’

<!-- @segment mn12:6.1 -->

And there’s no way Sunakkhatta will infer about me from the teaching:

<!-- @segment mn12:6.2 -->

‘That Blessed One wields the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying himself and becoming one again; materializing and dematerializing; going unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful; controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity.’

<!-- @segment mn12:7.1 -->

And there’s no way Sunakkhatta will infer about me from the teaching:

<!-- @segment mn12:7.2 -->

‘That Blessed One, with clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, hears both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.’

<!-- @segment mn12:8.1 -->

And there’s no way Sunakkhatta will infer about me from the teaching:

<!-- @segment mn12:8.2 -->

‘That Blessed One understands the minds of other beings and individuals, having encompassed them with his own mind.

<!-- @segment mn12:8.3 -->

He understands mind with greed as “mind with greed,”

<!-- @segment mn12:8.4 -->

and mind without greed as “mind without greed.”

<!-- @segment mn12:8.5 -->

He understands mind with hate …

<!-- @segment mn12:8.6 -->

mind without hate …

<!-- @segment mn12:8.7 -->

mind with delusion …

<!-- @segment mn12:8.8 -->

mind without delusion …

<!-- @segment mn12:8.9 -->

constricted mind …

<!-- @segment mn12:8.10 -->

scattered mind …

<!-- @segment mn12:8.11 -->

expansive mind …

<!-- @segment mn12:8.12 -->

unexpansive mind …

<!-- @segment mn12:8.13 -->

mind that is supreme …

<!-- @segment mn12:8.14 -->

mind that is not supreme …

<!-- @segment mn12:8.15 -->

mind immersed in samādhi …

<!-- @segment mn12:8.16 -->

mind not immersed in samādhi …

<!-- @segment mn12:8.17 -->

freed mind as “freed mind,”

<!-- @segment mn12:8.18 -->

and unfreed mind as “unfreed mind.”’

<!-- @segment mn12:9.1 -->

There are these ten powers of a Realized One that the Realized One possesses. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel.

<!-- @segment mn12:9.2 -->

What ten?

<!-- @segment mn12:10.1 -->

Firstly, the Realized One truly understands the possible as possible, and the impossible as impossible.

<!-- @segment mn12:10.2 -->

Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. Relying on this he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel.

<!-- @segment mn12:11.1 -->

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the result of deeds undertaken in the past, future, and present in terms of grounds and causes.

<!-- @segment mn12:11.2 -->

Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. …

<!-- @segment mn12:12.1 -->

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands where all paths of practice lead.

<!-- @segment mn12:12.2 -->

Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. …

<!-- @segment mn12:13.1 -->

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the world with its many and diverse elements.

<!-- @segment mn12:13.2 -->

Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. …

<!-- @segment mn12:14.1 -->

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the diverse convictions of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment mn12:14.2 -->

Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. …

<!-- @segment mn12:15.1 -->

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the faculties of other sentient beings and other individuals after encompassing them with his mind.

<!-- @segment mn12:15.2 -->

Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. …

<!-- @segment mn12:16.1 -->

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands corruption, cleansing, and emergence regarding the absorptions, liberations, immersions, and attainments.

<!-- @segment mn12:16.2 -->

Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. …

<!-- @segment mn12:17.1 -->

Furthermore, the Realized One recollects many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. He remembers: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so he recollects his many kinds of past lives, with features and details.

<!-- @segment mn12:17.2 -->

Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. …

<!-- @segment mn12:18.1 -->

Furthermore, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, the Realized One sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. He understands how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. ‘These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, he sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. He understands how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds.

<!-- @segment mn12:18.2 -->

Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. …

<!-- @segment mn12:19.1 -->

Furthermore, the Realized One has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and lives having realized it with his own insight due to the ending of defilements.

<!-- @segment mn12:19.2 -->

Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. Relying on this he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel.

<!-- @segment mn12:20.1 -->

A Realized One possesses these ten powers of a Realized One. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel.

<!-- @segment mn12:21.1 -->

When I know and see in this way, suppose someone were to say this:

<!-- @segment mn12:21.2 -->

‘The ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.

<!-- @segment mn12:21.3 -->

He teaches what he’s worked out by logic, following a line of inquiry, expressing his own perspective.’

<!-- @segment mn12:21.4 -->

Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be placed in hell as if delivered there.

<!-- @segment mn12:21.5 -->

Just as a mendicant accomplished in ethics, immersion, and wisdom would reach enlightenment in this very life, such is the consequence, I say.

<!-- @segment mn12:21.6 -->

Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be placed in hell as if delivered there.

<!-- @segment mn12:22.1 -->

Sāriputta, a Realized One has four kinds of self-assurance. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel.

<!-- @segment mn12:22.2 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment mn12:23.1 -->

I see no reason for anyone—whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or the Divinity, or anyone else in the world—to legitimately scold me, saying: ‘You claim to be a fully awakened Buddha, but you don’t understand these things.’

<!-- @segment mn12:23.2 -->

Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and self-assured.

<!-- @segment mn12:24.1 -->

I see no reason for anyone—whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or the Divinity, or anyone else in the world—to legitimately scold me, saying: ‘You claim to have ended all defilements, but you still have these defilements.’

<!-- @segment mn12:24.2 -->

Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and self-assured.

<!-- @segment mn12:25.1 -->

I see no reason for anyone—whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or the Divinity, or anyone else in the world—to legitimately scold me, saying: ‘The acts that you say are obstructions are not really obstructions for the one who performs them.’

<!-- @segment mn12:25.2 -->

Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and self-assured.

<!-- @segment mn12:26.1 -->

I see no reason for anyone—whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or the Divinity, or anyone else in the world—to legitimately scold me, saying: ‘The teaching doesn’t lead those who practice it to the complete ending of suffering, the goal for which it is taught.’

<!-- @segment mn12:26.2 -->

Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and self-assured.

<!-- @segment mn12:27.1 -->

A Realized One possesses these four kinds of self-assurance. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel.

<!-- @segment mn12:28.1 -->

When I know and see in this way, suppose someone were to say this:

<!-- @segment mn12:28.2 -->

‘The ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones …’

<!-- @segment mn12:28.3 -->

Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be placed in hell as if delivered there.

<!-- @segment mn12:28.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:28.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:29.1 -->

Sāriputta, there are these eight assemblies.

<!-- @segment mn12:29.2 -->

What eight?

<!-- @segment mn12:29.3 -->

The assemblies of aristocrats, brahmins, householders, and ascetics. An assembly of the gods of the four great kings. An assembly of the gods of the thirty-three. An assembly of Māras. An assembly of divinities.

<!-- @segment mn12:29.4 -->

These are the eight assemblies.

<!-- @segment mn12:29.5 -->

Possessing these four kinds of self-assurance, the Realized One approaches and enters right into these eight assemblies.

<!-- @segment mn12:29.6 -->

I recall having approached an assembly of hundreds of aristocrats.

<!-- @segment mn12:29.7 -->

There I used to sit with them, converse, and engage in discussion.

<!-- @segment mn12:29.8 -->

But I don’t see any reason to feel afraid or insecure.

<!-- @segment mn12:29.9 -->

Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and self-assured.

<!-- @segment mn12:30.1 -->

I recall having approached an assembly of hundreds of brahmins …

<!-- @segment mn12:30.2 -->

householders …

<!-- @segment mn12:30.3 -->

ascetics …

<!-- @segment mn12:30.4 -->

the gods of the four great kings …

<!-- @segment mn12:30.5 -->

the gods of the thirty-three …

<!-- @segment mn12:30.6 -->

Māras …

<!-- @segment mn12:30.7 -->

divinities.

<!-- @segment mn12:30.8 -->

There too I used to sit with them, converse, and engage in discussion.

<!-- @segment mn12:30.9 -->

But I don’t see any reason to feel afraid or insecure.

<!-- @segment mn12:30.10 -->

Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and self-assured.

<!-- @segment mn12:31.1 -->

When I know and see in this way, suppose someone were to say this:

<!-- @segment mn12:31.2 -->

‘The ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones …’

<!-- @segment mn12:31.3 -->

Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be placed in hell as if delivered there.

<!-- @segment mn12:31.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:31.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:32.1 -->

Sāriputta, there are these four kinds of reproduction.

<!-- @segment mn12:32.2 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment mn12:32.3 -->

Reproduction for creatures born from an egg, from a womb, from moisture, or spontaneously.

<!-- @segment mn12:33.1 -->

And what is reproduction from an egg?

<!-- @segment mn12:33.2 -->

There are beings who are born by breaking out of an eggshell.

<!-- @segment mn12:33.3 -->

This is called reproduction from an egg.

<!-- @segment mn12:33.4 -->

And what is reproduction from a womb?

<!-- @segment mn12:33.5 -->

There are beings who are born by breaking out of the amniotic sac.

<!-- @segment mn12:33.6 -->

This is called reproduction from a womb.

<!-- @segment mn12:33.7 -->

And what is reproduction from moisture?

<!-- @segment mn12:33.8 -->

There are beings who are born in a rotten fish, in a rotten carcass, in rotten dough, in a cesspool or a sump.

<!-- @segment mn12:33.9 -->

This is called reproduction from moisture.

<!-- @segment mn12:33.10 -->

And what is spontaneous reproduction?

<!-- @segment mn12:33.11 -->

Gods, hell-beings, certain humans, and certain beings in the lower realms.

<!-- @segment mn12:33.12 -->

This is called spontaneous reproduction.

<!-- @segment mn12:33.13 -->

These are the four kinds of reproduction.

<!-- @segment mn12:34.1 -->

When I know and see in this way, suppose someone were to say this:

<!-- @segment mn12:34.2 -->

‘The ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones …’

<!-- @segment mn12:34.3 -->

Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be placed in hell as if delivered there.

<!-- @segment mn12:34.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:34.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:35.1 -->

There are these five destinations.

<!-- @segment mn12:35.2 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment mn12:35.3 -->

Hell, the animal realm, the ghost realm, humanity, and the gods.

<!-- @segment mn12:36.1 -->

I understand hell, and the path and practice that leads to hell.

<!-- @segment mn12:36.2 -->

And I understand how someone practicing that way, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.

<!-- @segment mn12:36.3 -->

I understand the animal realm …

<!-- @segment mn12:36.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:36.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:36.6 -->

the ghost realm …

<!-- @segment mn12:36.7 -->

humanity …

<!-- @segment mn12:36.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:36.9 -->

gods, and the path and practice that leads to the world of the gods.

<!-- @segment mn12:36.10 -->

And I understand how someone practicing that way, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

<!-- @segment mn12:36.11 -->

And I understand extinguishment, and the path and practice that leads to extinguishment.

<!-- @segment mn12:36.12 -->

And I understand how someone practicing that way realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and lives having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.

<!-- @segment mn12:37.1 -->

When I’ve comprehended the mind of a certain individual, I understand:

<!-- @segment mn12:37.2 -->

‘This individual is practicing in such a way and is riding upon such a path that when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.’

<!-- @segment mn12:37.3 -->

Some time later I see that they have indeed been reborn in hell, where they experience exclusively painful feelings, sharp and severe.

<!-- @segment mn12:37.4 -->

Suppose there was a pit of glowing coals deeper than a man’s height, full of glowing coals that neither flamed nor smoked.

<!-- @segment mn12:37.5 -->

Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. And they have set out on a path that meets with that same pit of coals.

<!-- @segment mn12:37.6 -->

If a person with clear eyes saw them, they’d say:

<!-- @segment mn12:37.7 -->

‘This person is proceeding in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will arrive at that very pit of coals.’

<!-- @segment mn12:37.8 -->

Some time later they see that they have indeed fallen into that pit of coals, where they experience exclusively painful feelings, sharp and severe. …

<!-- @segment mn12:37.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:37.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:37.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:38.1 -->

When I’ve comprehended the mind of a certain individual, I understand:

<!-- @segment mn12:38.2 -->

‘This individual … will be reborn in the animal realm.’

<!-- @segment mn12:38.3 -->

Some time later I see that they have indeed been reborn in the animal realm, where they suffer painful feelings, sharp and severe.

<!-- @segment mn12:38.4 -->

Suppose there was a sewer deeper than a man’s height, full to the brim with feces.

<!-- @segment mn12:38.5 -->

Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. And they have set out on a path that meets with that same sewer.

<!-- @segment mn12:38.6 -->

If a person with clear eyes saw them, they’d say:

<!-- @segment mn12:38.7 -->

‘This person is proceeding in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will arrive at that very sewer.’

<!-- @segment mn12:38.8 -->

Some time later they see that they have indeed fallen into that sewer, where they suffer painful feelings, sharp and severe. …

<!-- @segment mn12:38.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:38.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:38.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:39.1 -->

When I’ve comprehended the mind of a certain individual, I understand:

<!-- @segment mn12:39.2 -->

‘This individual … will be reborn in the ghost realm.’

<!-- @segment mn12:39.3 -->

Some time later I see that they have indeed been reborn in the ghost realm, where they experience mostly painful feelings.

<!-- @segment mn12:39.4 -->

Suppose there was a tree growing on rugged ground, with thin foliage casting dappled shade.

<!-- @segment mn12:39.5 -->

Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. And they have set out on a path that meets with that same tree.

<!-- @segment mn12:39.6 -->

If a person with clear eyes saw them, they’d say:

<!-- @segment mn12:39.7 -->

‘This person is proceeding in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will arrive at that very tree.’

<!-- @segment mn12:39.8 -->

Some time later they see them sitting or lying under that tree, where they experience mostly painful feelings. …

<!-- @segment mn12:39.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:39.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:39.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:40.1 -->

When I’ve comprehended the mind of a certain individual, I understand:

<!-- @segment mn12:40.2 -->

‘This individual … will be reborn among human beings.’

<!-- @segment mn12:40.3 -->

Some time later I see that they have indeed been reborn among human beings, where they experience mostly pleasant feelings.

<!-- @segment mn12:40.4 -->

Suppose there was a tree growing on smooth ground, with abundant foliage casting dense shade.

<!-- @segment mn12:40.5 -->

Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. And they have set out on a path that meets with that same tree.

<!-- @segment mn12:40.6 -->

If a person with clear eyes saw them, they’d say:

<!-- @segment mn12:40.7 -->

‘This person is proceeding in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will arrive at that very tree.’

<!-- @segment mn12:40.8 -->

Some time later they see them sitting or lying under that tree, where they experience mostly pleasant feelings. …

<!-- @segment mn12:40.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:40.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:40.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:41.1 -->

When I’ve comprehended the mind of a certain individual, I understand:

<!-- @segment mn12:41.2 -->

‘This individual … will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’

<!-- @segment mn12:41.3 -->

Some time later I see that they have indeed been reborn in a heavenly realm, where they experience feelings of perfect happiness.

<!-- @segment mn12:41.4 -->

Suppose there was a stilt longhouse with a peaked roof, plastered inside and out, draft-free, with door fastened and window shuttered.

<!-- @segment mn12:41.5 -->

And it had a couch spread with woolen covers—shag-piled, pure white, or embroidered with flowers—and spread with a fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red pillows at both ends.

<!-- @segment mn12:41.6 -->

Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. And they have set out on a path that meets with that same stilt longhouse.

<!-- @segment mn12:41.7 -->

If a person with clear eyes saw them, they’d say:

<!-- @segment mn12:41.8 -->

‘This person is proceeding in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will arrive at that very stilt longhouse.’

<!-- @segment mn12:41.9 -->

Some time later they see them sitting or lying in that stilt longhouse, where they experience feelings of perfect happiness. …

<!-- @segment mn12:41.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:41.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:41.12 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:42.1 -->

When I’ve comprehended the mind of a certain individual, I understand:

<!-- @segment mn12:42.2 -->

‘This individual is practicing in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.’

<!-- @segment mn12:42.3 -->

Some time later I see that they have indeed realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements, experiencing feelings of perfect happiness.

<!-- @segment mn12:42.4 -->

Suppose there was a lotus pond with clear, sweet, cool water, clean, with smooth banks, delightful.

<!-- @segment mn12:42.5 -->

Nearby was a dense forest grove.

<!-- @segment mn12:42.6 -->

Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. And they have set out on a path that meets with that same lotus pond.

<!-- @segment mn12:42.7 -->

If a person with clear eyes saw them, they’d say:

<!-- @segment mn12:42.8 -->

‘This person is proceeding in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will arrive at that very lotus pond.’

<!-- @segment mn12:42.9 -->

Some time later they would see that person after they had plunged into that lotus pond, bathed and drunk. When all their stress, weariness, and heat exhaustion had faded away, they emerged and sat or lay down in that woodland thicket, where they experienced feelings of perfect happiness.

<!-- @segment mn12:42.10 -->

In the same way, when I’ve comprehended the mind of an individual, I understand:

<!-- @segment mn12:42.11 -->

‘This individual is practicing in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.’

<!-- @segment mn12:42.12 -->

Some time later I see that they have indeed realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements, experiencing feelings of perfect happiness.

<!-- @segment mn12:42.13 -->

These are the five destinations.

<!-- @segment mn12:43.1 -->

When I know and see in this way, suppose someone were to say this:

<!-- @segment mn12:43.2 -->

‘The ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.

<!-- @segment mn12:43.3 -->

He teaches what he’s worked out by logic, following a line of inquiry, expressing his own perspective.’

<!-- @segment mn12:43.4 -->

Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be placed in hell as if delivered there.

<!-- @segment mn12:43.5 -->

Just as a mendicant accomplished in ethics, immersion, and wisdom would reach enlightenment in this very life, such is the consequence, I say.

<!-- @segment mn12:43.6 -->

Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be placed in hell as if delivered there.

<!-- @segment mn12:44.1 -->

Sāriputta, I recall having practiced a spiritual path consisting of four factors.

<!-- @segment mn12:44.2 -->

I used to be a fervent mortifier, the ultimate fervent mortifier. I used to live rough, the ultimate rough-liver. I used to live in disgust of sin, the ultimate one living in disgust of sin. I used to be secluded, in ultimate seclusion.

<!-- @segment mn12:45.1 -->

And this is what my fervent mortification was like. I went naked, ignoring conventions. I licked my hands, and didn’t come or stop when asked. I didn’t consent to food brought to me, or food prepared specially for me, or an invitation for a meal.

<!-- @segment mn12:45.2 -->

I didn’t receive anything from a pot or bowl; or from someone who keeps sheep, or who has a weapon or a shovel in their home; or where a couple is eating; or where there is a woman who is pregnant, breastfeeding, or who lives with a man; or where food for distribution is advertised; or where there’s a hound waiting or flies buzzing. I accepted no fish or meat or beer or wine, and drank no fermented gruel.

<!-- @segment mn12:45.3 -->

I went to just one house for alms, taking just one mouthful, or two houses and two mouthfuls, up to seven houses and seven mouthfuls.

<!-- @segment mn12:45.4 -->

I fed on one saucer a day, two saucers a day, up to seven saucers a day.

<!-- @segment mn12:45.5 -->

I ate once a day, once every second day, up to once a week, and so on, even up to once a fortnight. I lived committed to the practice of eating food at set intervals.

<!-- @segment mn12:45.6 -->

I ate herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce, rice bran, scum from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung. I survived on forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen fruit.

<!-- @segment mn12:45.7 -->

I wore robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags, lodh tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark, wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls’ wings.

<!-- @segment mn12:45.8 -->

I tore out hair and beard, committed to this practice.

<!-- @segment mn12:45.9 -->

I constantly stood, turning down seats.

<!-- @segment mn12:45.10 -->

I squatted, committed to the endeavor of squatting.

<!-- @segment mn12:45.11 -->

I lay on a mat of thorns, making a mat of thorns my bed.

<!-- @segment mn12:45.12 -->

I was devoted to ritual bathing three times a day, including at dusk.

<!-- @segment mn12:45.13 -->

And so I lived committed to practicing these various ways of mortifying and tormenting the body.

<!-- @segment mn12:45.14 -->

Such was my practice of fervent mortification.

<!-- @segment mn12:46.1 -->

And this is what my rough living was like.

<!-- @segment mn12:46.2 -->

The dust and dirt built up on my body over many years until it started flaking off.

<!-- @segment mn12:46.3 -->

It’s like the trunk of a pale-moon ebony tree, which builds up bark over many years until it starts flaking off.

<!-- @segment mn12:46.4 -->

But it didn’t occur to me:

<!-- @segment mn12:46.5 -->

‘Oh, this dust and dirt must be rubbed off by my hand or another’s.’

<!-- @segment mn12:46.6 -->

That didn’t occur to me.

<!-- @segment mn12:46.7 -->

Such was my rough living.

<!-- @segment mn12:47.1 -->

And this is what my living in disgust of sin was like.

<!-- @segment mn12:47.2 -->

I’d step forward or back ever so mindfully, so I was full of pity regarding even a drop of water, thinking:

<!-- @segment mn12:47.3 -->

‘May I not injure any little creatures on unclear ground.’

<!-- @segment mn12:47.4 -->

Such was my living in disgust of sin.

<!-- @segment mn12:48.1 -->

And this is what my seclusion was like.

<!-- @segment mn12:48.2 -->

I would plunge deep into a wilderness region and stay there.

<!-- @segment mn12:48.3 -->

When I saw a cowherd or a shepherd, or someone gathering grass or sticks, or a lumberjack, I’d flee from forest to forest, from thicket to thicket, from valley to valley, from uplands to uplands.

<!-- @segment mn12:48.4 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment mn12:48.5 -->

So that I wouldn’t see them, nor they me.

<!-- @segment mn12:48.6 -->

I fled like a wild deer seeing a human being.

<!-- @segment mn12:48.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:48.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:48.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:48.10 -->

Such was my practice of seclusion.

<!-- @segment mn12:49.1 -->

I would go on all fours into the cow-pens after the cattle had left and eat the dung of the young suckling calves.

<!-- @segment mn12:49.2 -->

As long as my own urine and excrement lasted, I would even eat that.

<!-- @segment mn12:49.3 -->

Such was my eating of most unnatural things.

<!-- @segment mn12:50.1 -->

I would plunge deep into an awe-inspiring forest grove and stay there.

<!-- @segment mn12:50.2 -->

It was so awe-inspiring that

<!-- @segment mn12:50.3 -->

normally it would make your hair stand on end if you weren’t free of greed.

<!-- @segment mn12:50.4 -->

And on days such as the cold spell when the snow falls in the January winter, I stayed in the open by night and in the forest by day.

<!-- @segment mn12:50.5 -->

But in the last month of summer I’d stay in the open by day and in the forest by night.

<!-- @segment mn12:50.6 -->

And then these verses, which were neither supernaturally inspired, nor learned before in the past, occurred to me:

<!-- @segment mn12:50.7 -->

‘Scorched and frozen,

<!-- @segment mn12:50.8 -->

alone in the awe-inspiring forest.

<!-- @segment mn12:50.9 -->

nude, no fire to sit beside,

<!-- @segment mn12:50.10 -->

the sage still pursues his quest.’

<!-- @segment mn12:51.1 -->

I would make my bed in a charnel ground, with the bones of the dead for a pillow.

<!-- @segment mn12:51.2 -->

Then village louts would come up to me. They’d spit and piss on me, throw mud on me, even poke sticks in my ears.

<!-- @segment mn12:51.3 -->

But I don’t recall ever having a bad thought about them.

<!-- @segment mn12:51.4 -->

Such was my abiding in equanimity.

<!-- @segment mn12:52.1 -->

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:

<!-- @segment mn12:52.2 -->

‘Purity comes from food.’

<!-- @segment mn12:52.3 -->

They say:

<!-- @segment mn12:52.4 -->

‘Let’s live on jujubes.’

<!-- @segment mn12:52.5 -->

So they eat jujubes and jujube powder, and drink jujube juice.

<!-- @segment mn12:52.6 -->

And they enjoy many jujube concoctions.

<!-- @segment mn12:52.7 -->

I recall eating just a single jujube.

<!-- @segment mn12:52.8 -->

You might think that

<!-- @segment mn12:52.9 -->

at that time the jujubes must have been very big.

<!-- @segment mn12:52.10 -->

But you should not see it like this.

<!-- @segment mn12:52.11 -->

The jujubes then were at most the same size as today.

<!-- @segment mn12:52.12 -->

Eating so very little, my body became severely emaciated.

<!-- @segment mn12:52.13 -->

Due to eating so little, my major and minor limbs became like the joints of an eighty-year-old or a dying man,

<!-- @segment mn12:52.14 -->

my bottom became like a camel’s hoof,

<!-- @segment mn12:52.15 -->

my vertebrae stuck out like beads on a string,

<!-- @segment mn12:52.16 -->

and my ribs were as gaunt as the broken-down rafters on an old barn.

<!-- @segment mn12:52.17 -->

Due to eating so little, the gleam of my eyes sank deep in their sockets, like the gleam of water sunk deep down a well.

<!-- @segment mn12:52.18 -->

Due to eating so little, my scalp shriveled and withered like a green bitter-gourd in the wind and sun.

<!-- @segment mn12:52.19 -->

Due to eating so little, the skin of my belly stuck to my backbone, so that when I tried to rub the skin of my belly I grabbed my backbone, and when I tried to rub my backbone I rubbed the skin of my belly.

<!-- @segment mn12:52.20 -->

Due to eating so little, when I tried to urinate or defecate I fell face down right there.

<!-- @segment mn12:52.21 -->

Due to eating so little, when I tried to relieve my body by rubbing my limbs with my hands, the hair, rotted at its roots, fell out.

<!-- @segment mn12:53-55.1 -->

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:

<!-- @segment mn12:53-55.2 -->

‘Purity comes from food.’

<!-- @segment mn12:53-55.3 -->

They say:

<!-- @segment mn12:53-55.4 -->

‘Let’s live on mung beans.’ …

<!-- @segment mn12:53-55.5 -->

‘Let’s live on sesame.’ …

<!-- @segment mn12:53-55.6 -->

‘Let’s live on ordinary rice.’ …

<!-- @segment mn12:53-55.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:53-55.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:53-55.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:53-55.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:53-55.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:53-55.12 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:53-55.13 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:53-55.14 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:53-55.15 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:53-55.16 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:53-55.17 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:53-55.18 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:53-55.19 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:53-55.20 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:53-55.21 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:53-55.22 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:53-55.23 -->

Due to eating so little, when I tried to relieve my body by rubbing my limbs with my hands, the hair, rotted at its roots, fell out.

<!-- @segment mn12:56.1 -->

But Sāriputta, I did not achieve any superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones by that conduct, that practice, that grueling work.

<!-- @segment mn12:56.2 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment mn12:56.3 -->

Because I didn’t achieve that noble wisdom that’s noble and emancipating, and which delivers one who practices it to the complete ending of suffering.

<!-- @segment mn12:57.1 -->

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:

<!-- @segment mn12:57.2 -->

‘Purity comes from transmigration.’

<!-- @segment mn12:57.3 -->

But it’s not easy to find a realm that I haven’t previously transmigrated to in all this long time, except for the gods of the pure abodes.

<!-- @segment mn12:57.4 -->

For if I had transmigrated to the gods of the pure abodes I would not have returned to this realm again.

<!-- @segment mn12:58.1 -->

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:

<!-- @segment mn12:58.2 -->

‘Purity comes from rebirth.’

<!-- @segment mn12:58.3 -->

But it’s not easy to find any rebirth that I haven’t previously been reborn in …

<!-- @segment mn12:58.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:59.1 -->

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:

<!-- @segment mn12:59.2 -->

‘Purity comes from abode of rebirth.’

<!-- @segment mn12:59.3 -->

But it’s not easy to find an abode where I haven’t previously abided …

<!-- @segment mn12:59.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:60.1 -->

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:

<!-- @segment mn12:60.2 -->

‘Purity comes from sacrifice.’

<!-- @segment mn12:60.3 -->

But it’s not easy to find a sacrifice that I haven’t previously offered in all this long time, when I was an anointed aristocratic king or a well-to-do brahmin.

<!-- @segment mn12:61.1 -->

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:

<!-- @segment mn12:61.2 -->

‘Purity comes from serving the sacred flame.’

<!-- @segment mn12:61.3 -->

But it’s not easy to find a fire that I haven’t previously served in all this long time, when I was an anointed aristocratic king or a well-to-do brahmin.

<!-- @segment mn12:62.1 -->

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:

<!-- @segment mn12:62.2 -->

‘So long as this gentleman is youthful, young, with pristine black hair, blessed with youth, in the prime of life he will be endowed with perfect lucidity of wisdom.

<!-- @segment mn12:62.3 -->

But when he’s old, elderly, and senior, advanced in years, and has reached the final stage of life—eighty, ninety, or a hundred years old—he will lose his lucidity of wisdom.’

<!-- @segment mn12:62.4 -->

But you should not see it like this.

<!-- @segment mn12:62.5 -->

For now I am old, elderly, and senior, I’m advanced in years, and have reached the final stage of life. I am eighty years old.

<!-- @segment mn12:62.6 -->

Suppose I had four disciples with a lifespan of a hundred years. And they each were perfect in memory, range, retention, and perfect lucidity of wisdom.

<!-- @segment mn12:62.7 -->

Imagine how easily a well-trained expert archer with a strong bow would shoot a light arrow across the shadow of a palm tree.

<!-- @segment mn12:62.8 -->

That’s how extraordinary they were in memory, range, retention, and perfect lucidity of wisdom.

<!-- @segment mn12:62.9 -->

They’d bring up questions about the four kinds of mindfulness meditation again and again, and I would answer each question. They’d remember the answers and not ask the same question twice.

<!-- @segment mn12:62.10 -->

And they’d pause only to eat and drink, go to the toilet, and sleep to dispel weariness. But the Realized One would not run out of Dhamma teachings, words and phrases of the teachings, or spontaneous answers.

<!-- @segment mn12:62.11 -->

And at the end of a hundred years my four disciples would pass away.

<!-- @segment mn12:62.12 -->

Even if you have to carry me around on a stretcher, there will never be any deterioration in the Realized One’s lucidity of wisdom.

<!-- @segment mn12:63.1 -->

And if there’s anyone of whom it may be rightly said that

<!-- @segment mn12:63.2 -->

a being not liable to delusion has arisen in the world for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans, it’s of me that this should be said.”

<!-- @segment mn12:63.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn12:64.1 -->

Now at that time Venerable Nāgasamāla was standing behind the Buddha fanning him.

<!-- @segment mn12:64.2 -->

Then he said to the Buddha:

<!-- @segment mn12:64.3 -->

“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing!

<!-- @segment mn12:64.4 -->

While I was listening to this exposition of the teaching my hair stood up!

<!-- @segment mn12:64.5 -->

What is the name of this exposition of the teaching?”

<!-- @segment mn12:64.6 -->

“Well then, Nāgasamāla, you may remember this exposition of the teaching as ‘The Hair-raising Discourse’.”

<!-- @segment mn12:64.7 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn12:64.8 -->

Satisfied, Venerable Nāgasamāla approved what the Buddha said.
