---
slug: mn125
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Level of the Tamed
---

<!-- @segment mn125:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn125:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground.

<!-- @segment mn125:2.1 -->

Now at that time the novice Aciravata was staying in a wilderness hut.

<!-- @segment mn125:2.2 -->

Then as Prince Jayasena was going for a walk he approached Aciravata, and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment mn125:2.3 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to Aciravata,

<!-- @segment mn125:2.4 -->

“Worthy Aggivessana, I have heard that

<!-- @segment mn125:2.5 -->

a mendicant who meditates diligently, keenly, and resolutely can experience unification of mind.”

<!-- @segment mn125:2.6 -->

“That’s so true, Prince! That’s so true!

<!-- @segment mn125:2.7 -->

A mendicant who meditates diligently, keenly, and resolutely can experience unification of mind.”

<!-- @segment mn125:3.1 -->

“Worthy Aggivessana, please teach me the Dhamma as you have learned and memorized it.”

<!-- @segment mn125:3.2 -->

“I’m not competent to do so, Prince.

<!-- @segment mn125:3.3 -->

For if I were to teach you the Dhamma as I have learned and memorized it, you might not understand the meaning, which would be wearying and troublesome for me.”

<!-- @segment mn125:4.1 -->

“Worthy Aggivessana, please teach me the Dhamma as you have learned and memorized it.

<!-- @segment mn125:4.2 -->

Hopefully I will understand the meaning of what you say.”

<!-- @segment mn125:4.3 -->

“I shall teach you.

<!-- @segment mn125:4.4 -->

If you understand the meaning of what I say, that’s good.

<!-- @segment mn125:4.5 -->

If not, then leave each to his own, and do not question me about it further.”

<!-- @segment mn125:4.6 -->

“Worthy Aggivessana, please teach me the Dhamma as you have learned and memorized it.

<!-- @segment mn125:4.7 -->

If I understand the meaning of what you say, that’s good.

<!-- @segment mn125:4.8 -->

If not, then I will leave each to his own, and not question you about it further.”

<!-- @segment mn125:5.1 -->

Then the novice Aciravata taught Prince Jayasena the Dhamma as he had learned and memorized it.

<!-- @segment mn125:5.2 -->

When he had spoken, Jayasena said to him,

<!-- @segment mn125:5.3 -->

“It is impossible, worthy Aggivessana, it cannot happen that a mendicant who meditates diligently, keenly, and resolutely can experience unification of mind.”

<!-- @segment mn125:5.4 -->

Having declared that this was impossible, Jayasena rose from his seat and left.

<!-- @segment mn125:6.1 -->

Not long after he had left, Aciravata went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side,

<!-- @segment mn125:6.2 -->

and informed the Buddha of all they had discussed.

<!-- @segment mn125:7.1 -->

When he had spoken, the Buddha said to him,

<!-- @segment mn125:7.2 -->

“How could it possibly be otherwise, Aggivessana?

<!-- @segment mn125:7.3 -->

Prince Jayasena dwells in the midst of sensual pleasures, enjoying them, consumed by thoughts of them, burning with fever for them, and eagerly seeking more. It’s simply impossible for him to know or see or realize what can only be known, seen, and realized by renunciation.

<!-- @segment mn125:8.1 -->

Suppose there was a pair of elephants or horse or oxen in training who were well tamed and well trained. And there was a pair who were not tamed or trained.

<!-- @segment mn125:8.2 -->

What do you think, Aggivessana?

<!-- @segment mn125:8.3 -->

Wouldn’t the pair that was well tamed and well trained perform the tasks of the tamed and reach the level of the tamed?”

<!-- @segment mn125:8.4 -->

“Yes, sir.”

<!-- @segment mn125:8.5 -->

“But would the pair that was not tamed and trained perform the tasks of the tamed and reach the level of the tamed, just like the tamed pair?”

<!-- @segment mn125:8.6 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment mn125:8.7 -->

“In the same way, Prince Jayasena dwells in the midst of sensual pleasures, enjoying them, consumed by thoughts of them, burning with fever for them, and eagerly seeking more. It’s simply impossible for him to know or see or realize what can only be known, seen, and realized by renunciation.

<!-- @segment mn125:9.1 -->

Suppose there was a big mountain not far from a town or village.

<!-- @segment mn125:9.2 -->

And two friends set out from that village or town, lending each other a hand up to the mountain. Once there, one friend would remain at the foot of the mountain, while the other would climb to the peak.

<!-- @segment mn125:9.3 -->

The one standing at the foot would say to the one at the peak,

<!-- @segment mn125:9.4 -->

‘My dear, what do you see, standing there at the peak?’

<!-- @segment mn125:9.5 -->

They’d reply,

<!-- @segment mn125:9.6 -->

‘Standing at the peak, I see delightful parks, woods, meadows, and lotus ponds!’

<!-- @segment mn125:9.7 -->

But the other would say,

<!-- @segment mn125:9.8 -->

‘It’s impossible, it cannot happen that, standing at the peak, you can see delightful parks, woods, meadows, and lotus ponds.’

<!-- @segment mn125:9.9 -->

So their friend would come down from the peak, take their friend by the arm, and make them climb to the peak. After giving them a while to catch their breath, they’d say,

<!-- @segment mn125:9.10 -->

‘My dear, what do you see, standing here at the peak?’

<!-- @segment mn125:9.11 -->

They’d reply,

<!-- @segment mn125:9.12 -->

‘Standing at the peak, I see delightful parks, woods, meadows, and lotus ponds!’

<!-- @segment mn125:9.13 -->

They’d say,

<!-- @segment mn125:9.14 -->

‘Just now I understood you to say:

<!-- @segment mn125:9.15 -->

“It’s impossible, it cannot happen that, standing at the peak, you can see delightful parks, woods, meadows, and lotus ponds.”

<!-- @segment mn125:9.16 -->

But now you say:

<!-- @segment mn125:9.17 -->

“Standing at the peak, I see delightful parks, woods, meadows, and lotus ponds!”’

<!-- @segment mn125:9.18 -->

They’d say,

<!-- @segment mn125:9.19 -->

‘But my dear, it was because I was obstructed by this big mountain that I didn’t see what could be seen.’

<!-- @segment mn125:10.1 -->

But bigger than that is the mass of ignorance by which Prince Jayasena is obstructed, hindered, engulfed, and enveloped.

<!-- @segment mn125:10.2 -->

Prince Jayasena dwells in the midst of sensual pleasures, enjoying them, consumed by thoughts of them, burning with fever for them, and eagerly seeking more. It is quite impossible for him to know or see or realize what can only be known, seen, and realized by renunciation.

<!-- @segment mn125:11.1 -->

It would be no wonder if, had these two similes occurred to you, Prince Jayasena would have gained confidence in you and shown his confidence.”

<!-- @segment mn125:11.2 -->

“But sir, how could these two similes have occurred to me as they did to the Buddha, since they were neither supernaturally inspired, nor learned before in the past?”

<!-- @segment mn125:12.1 -->

“Suppose, Aggivessana, an anointed aristocratic king was to address his elephant tracker,

<!-- @segment mn125:12.2 -->

‘Please, my good elephant tracker, mount the royal bull elephant and enter the elephant wood. When you see a wild bull elephant, tether it by the neck to the royal elephant.’

<!-- @segment mn125:12.3 -->

‘Yes, Your Majesty,’ replied the elephant tracker, and did as he was asked.

<!-- @segment mn125:12.4 -->

The royal elephant leads the wild elephant out into the open;

<!-- @segment mn125:12.5 -->

and it’s only then that it comes out into the open,

<!-- @segment mn125:12.6 -->

for a wild bull elephant clings to the elephant wood.

<!-- @segment mn125:12.7 -->

The elephant tracker informs the king,

<!-- @segment mn125:12.8 -->

‘Sire, the wild elephant has come out into the open.’

<!-- @segment mn125:12.9 -->

Then the king addresses his elephant trainer,

<!-- @segment mn125:12.10 -->

‘Please, dear elephant trainer, tame the wild bull elephant. Subdue its wild behaviors, its wild memories and thoughts, and its wild stress, weariness, and fever. Make it happy to be within a village, and instill behaviors congenial to humans.’

<!-- @segment mn125:12.11 -->

‘Yes, Your Majesty,’ replied the elephant trainer. He dug a large post into the earth and tethered the elephant to it by the neck, so as to subdue its wild behaviors, its wild memories and thoughts, and its wild stress, weariness, and fever, and to make it happy to be within a village, and instill behaviors congenial to humans.

<!-- @segment mn125:12.12 -->

He spoke in a way that’s mellow, pleasing to the ear, endearing, going to the heart, polite, likable and agreeable to the people.

<!-- @segment mn125:12.13 -->

Spoken to in such a way by the elephant trainer, the wild elephant wanted to listen. It actively listened and tried to understand.

<!-- @segment mn125:12.14 -->

So the elephant trainer rewards it with grass, fodder, and water.

<!-- @segment mn125:12.15 -->

When the wild elephant accepts the grass, fodder, and water, the trainer knows,

<!-- @segment mn125:12.16 -->

‘Now the wild elephant will survive!’

<!-- @segment mn125:12.17 -->

He sets it a further task:

<!-- @segment mn125:12.18 -->

‘Pick it up, worthy sir! Put it down, worthy sir!’

<!-- @segment mn125:12.19 -->

When the wild elephant picks up and puts down when the trainer says, following instructions, the trainer sets it a further task:

<!-- @segment mn125:12.20 -->

‘Forward, worthy sir! Back, worthy sir!’

<!-- @segment mn125:12.21 -->

When the wild elephant goes forward and back when the trainer says, following instructions, the trainer sets it a further task:

<!-- @segment mn125:12.22 -->

‘Stand, worthy sir! Sit, worthy sir!’

<!-- @segment mn125:12.23 -->

When the wild elephant stands and sits when the trainer says, following instructions, the trainer sets the task called imperturbability. He fastens a large plank to its trunk; a lancer sits on its neck; other lancers surround it on all sides; and the trainer himself stands in front with a long lance.

<!-- @segment mn125:12.24 -->

While practicing this task, it doesn’t budge its fore-feet or hind-feet, its fore-quarters or hind-quarters, its head, ears, tusks, tail, or trunk.

<!-- @segment mn125:12.25 -->

The wild bull elephant endures being struck by spears, swords, arrows, and axes; it endures the thunder of the drums, kettledrums, pipes, horns, and tom-toms. Rid of all crooks and flaws, and purged of defects, it is worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and reckoned a factor of kingship.

<!-- @segment mn125:13.1 -->

In the same way, Aggivessana, a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.

<!-- @segment mn125:13.2 -->

He realizes with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others.

<!-- @segment mn125:13.3 -->

He proclaims a teaching that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure.

<!-- @segment mn125:14.1 -->

A householder hears that teaching, or a householder’s child, or someone reborn in a good family.

<!-- @segment mn125:14.2 -->

They gain faith in the Realized One

<!-- @segment mn125:14.3 -->

and reflect,

<!-- @segment mn125:14.4 -->

‘Life at home is cramped and dirty, life gone forth is wide open.

<!-- @segment mn125:14.5 -->

It’s not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell.

<!-- @segment mn125:14.6 -->

Why don’t I shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness?’

<!-- @segment mn125:14.7 -->

After some time they give up a large or small fortune, and a large or small family circle. They shave off hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment mn125:14.8 -->

And it’s only then that a noble disciple comes out into the open,

<!-- @segment mn125:14.9 -->

for gods and humans cling to the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

<!-- @segment mn125:15.1 -->

The Realized One guides them further:

<!-- @segment mn125:15.2 -->

‘Come, mendicant, be ethical and restrained in the monastic code, conducting yourself well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the rules you’ve undertaken.’

<!-- @segment mn125:16.1 -->

When they have ethical conduct, the Realized One guides them further:

<!-- @segment mn125:16.2 -->

‘Come, mendicant, guard your sense doors. When you see a sight with your eyes, don’t get caught up in the features and details. …

<!-- @segment mn125:17-21.1 -->

(Tell in full as in MN 107, the Discourse with Moggallāna the Accountant.)

<!-- @segment mn125:22.1 -->

They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom.

<!-- @segment mn125:22.2 -->

Then they meditate observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment mn125:23.1 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings …

<!-- @segment mn125:23.2 -->

mind …

<!-- @segment mn125:23.3 -->

principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment mn125:23.4 -->

It’s like when the elephant trainer dug a large post into the earth and tethered the elephant to it by the neck, so as to subdue its wild behaviors, its wild memories and thoughts, and its wild stress, weariness, and fever, and to make it happy to be within a village, and instill behaviors congenial to humans.

<!-- @segment mn125:23.5 -->

In the same way, a noble disciple has these four kinds of mindfulness meditation as tethers for the mind so as to subdue behaviors tied to domestic life, memories and thoughts tied to domestic life, stress, weariness, and fever tied to domestic life, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment.

<!-- @segment mn125:24.1 -->

The Realized One guides them further:

<!-- @segment mn125:24.2 -->

‘Come, mendicant, meditate observing an aspect of the body, but don’t think thoughts connected with sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment mn125:24.3 -->

Meditate observing an aspect of feelings …

<!-- @segment mn125:24.4 -->

mind …

<!-- @segment mn125:24.5 -->

principles, but don’t think thoughts connected with sensual pleasures.’

<!-- @segment mn125:25.1 -->

As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption …

<!-- @segment mn125:25.2 -->

third absorption …

<!-- @segment mn125:25.3 -->

fourth absorption.

<!-- @segment mn125:26.1 -->

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward recollection of past lives.

<!-- @segment mn125:26.2 -->

They recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details.

<!-- @segment mn125:27-28.1 -->

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment mn125:27-28.2 -->

With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds.

<!-- @segment mn125:29.1 -->

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of defilements.

<!-- @segment mn125:29.2 -->

They truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’.

<!-- @segment mn125:29.3 -->

They truly understand: ‘These are defilements’ … ‘This is the origin of defilements’ … ‘This is the cessation of defilements’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements’.

<!-- @segment mn125:29.4 -->

Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance.

<!-- @segment mn125:29.5 -->

When they’re freed, they know they’re freed.

<!-- @segment mn125:29.6 -->

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’

<!-- @segment mn125:30.1 -->

Such a mendicant endures cold, heat, hunger, and thirst; the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles; rude and unwelcome criticism; and puts up with physical pain—sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, and life-threatening.

<!-- @segment mn125:30.2 -->

Rid of all greed, hate, and delusion, and purged of defects, they are worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with cupped palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the world.

<!-- @segment mn125:31.1 -->

If a royal bull elephant—whether elderly, middle aged, or youthful—passes away untamed and untrained, they’re reckoned a royal bull elephant who passed away untamed.

<!-- @segment mn125:31.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn125:31.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn125:31.4 -->

In the same way, if a mendicant—whether senior, middle, or junior—passes away without having ended the defilements, they’re reckoned a mendicant who passed away untamed.

<!-- @segment mn125:31.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn125:31.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn125:32.1 -->

If a royal bull elephant—whether elderly, middle aged, or youthful—passes away tamed and trained, they’re reckoned a royal bull elephant who passed away tamed.

<!-- @segment mn125:32.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn125:32.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn125:32.4 -->

In the same way, if a mendicant—whether senior, middle, or junior—passes away having ended the defilements, they’re reckoned a mendicant who passed away tamed.”

<!-- @segment mn125:32.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn125:32.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn125:32.7 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn125:32.8 -->

Satisfied, the novice Aciravata approved what the Buddha said.
