---
slug: mn124
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Bakkula
---

<!-- @segment mn124:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn124:1.2 -->

At one time Venerable Bakkula was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground.

<!-- @segment mn124:2.1 -->

Then the naked ascetic Kassapa, an old friend of Bakkula in the lay life, approached him, and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment mn124:2.2 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to Venerable Bakkula,

<!-- @segment mn124:3.1 -->

“Reverend Bakkula, how long has it been since you went forth?”

<!-- @segment mn124:3.2 -->

“It has been eighty years, reverend.”

<!-- @segment mn124:3.3 -->

“But in these eighty years, how many times have you had sex?”

<!-- @segment mn124:3.4 -->

“You shouldn’t ask me such a question.

<!-- @segment mn124:3.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn124:3.6 -->

Rather, you should ask me this:

<!-- @segment mn124:3.7 -->

‘But in these eighty years, how many times have sensual perceptions ever arisen in you?’”

<!-- @segment mn124:3.8 -->

“But in these eighty years, how many times have sensual perceptions ever arisen in you?”

<!-- @segment mn124:3.9 -->

“In these eighty years, I don’t recall that any sensual perception has ever arisen in me.”

<!-- @segment mn124:3.10 -->

This we remember as an incredible and amazing quality of Venerable Bakkula.

<!-- @segment mn124:4-5.1 -->

“In these eighty years, I don’t recall that any perception of ill will …

<!-- @segment mn124:4-5.2 -->

or cruelty has ever arisen in me.”

<!-- @segment mn124:4-5.3 -->

This too we remember as an incredible and amazing quality of Venerable Bakkula.

<!-- @segment mn124:6.1 -->

“In these eighty years, I don’t recall that any thought of sensuality …

<!-- @segment mn124:6.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn124:7-8.1 -->

ill will …

<!-- @segment mn124:7-8.2 -->

or cruelty has ever arisen in me.”

<!-- @segment mn124:7-8.3 -->

This too we remember as an incredible and amazing quality of Venerable Bakkula.

<!-- @segment mn124:9.1 -->

“In these eighty years, I don’t recall accepting a robe from a householder …

<!-- @segment mn124:9.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn124:10.1 -->

cutting a robe with a knife …

<!-- @segment mn124:10.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn124:11-15.1 -->

sewing a robe with a needle …

<!-- @segment mn124:11-15.2 -->

dying a robe …

<!-- @segment mn124:11-15.3 -->

sewing a robe during the robe-making ceremony …

<!-- @segment mn124:11-15.4 -->

wandering to look for robe material for my companions in the spiritual life when they are making robes …

<!-- @segment mn124:16-19.1 -->

accepting an invitation …

<!-- @segment mn124:16-19.2 -->

having such a thought:

<!-- @segment mn124:16-19.3 -->

‘If only someone would invite me!’ …

<!-- @segment mn124:16-19.4 -->

sitting down inside a house …

<!-- @segment mn124:16-19.5 -->

eating inside a house …

<!-- @segment mn124:20-25.1 -->

getting caught up in the features by way of the details of a lady’s appearance …

<!-- @segment mn124:20-25.2 -->

teaching a lady, even so much as a four line verse …

<!-- @segment mn124:20-25.3 -->

going to the nuns’ quarters …

<!-- @segment mn124:20-25.4 -->

teaching the nuns …

<!-- @segment mn124:20-25.5 -->

teaching the trainee nuns …

<!-- @segment mn124:20-25.6 -->

teaching the novice nuns …

<!-- @segment mn124:26-29.1 -->

giving the going forth …

<!-- @segment mn124:26-29.2 -->

giving the ordination …

<!-- @segment mn124:26-29.3 -->

giving dependence …

<!-- @segment mn124:26-29.4 -->

being attended by a novice …

<!-- @segment mn124:30-36.1 -->

bathing in the sauna …

<!-- @segment mn124:30-36.2 -->

bathing with bath powder …

<!-- @segment mn124:30-36.3 -->

looking for a massage from my spiritual companions …

<!-- @segment mn124:30-36.4 -->

being ill, even for as long as it takes to pull a cow’s udder …

<!-- @segment mn124:30-36.5 -->

being presented with medicine, even as much as a bit of yellow myrobalan …

<!-- @segment mn124:30-36.6 -->

leaning on a leaning-board …

<!-- @segment mn124:30-36.7 -->

preparing a cot …”

<!-- @segment mn124:30-36.8 -->

This too we remember as an incredible and amazing quality of Venerable Bakkula.

<!-- @segment mn124:37.1 -->

“In these eighty years, I don’t recall commencing the rainy season residence within a village.”

<!-- @segment mn124:37.2 -->

This too we remember as an incredible and amazing quality of Venerable Bakkula.

<!-- @segment mn124:38.1 -->

“Reverend, for seven days I ate the nation’s almsfood as a debtor.

<!-- @segment mn124:38.2 -->

Then on the eighth day I became enlightened.”

<!-- @segment mn124:38.3 -->

This too we remember as an incredible and amazing quality of Venerable Bakkula.

<!-- @segment mn124:39.1 -->

“Reverend Bakkula, may I receive the going forth, the ordination in this teaching and training?”

<!-- @segment mn124:39.2 -->

And the naked ascetic Kassapa received the going forth, the ordination in this teaching and training.

<!-- @segment mn124:39.3 -->

Not long after his ordination, Venerable Kassapa, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment mn124:39.4 -->

He understood: “Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further for this place.”

<!-- @segment mn124:39.5 -->

And Venerable Kassapa became one of the perfected.

<!-- @segment mn124:40.1 -->

Then some time later Venerable Bakkula, taking a latchkey, went from dwelling to dwelling, saying,

<!-- @segment mn124:40.2 -->

“Come forth, venerables, come forth! Today will be my full extinguishment.”

<!-- @segment mn124:40.3 -->

This too we remember as an incredible and amazing quality of Venerable Bakkula.

<!-- @segment mn124:41.1 -->

And Venerable Bakkula became fully extinguished while seated right in the middle of the Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment mn124:41.2 -->

This too we remember as an incredible and amazing quality of Venerable Bakkula.
