---
slug: mn135
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Shorter Analysis of Deeds
---

<!-- @segment mn135:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn135:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment mn135:2.1 -->

Then the student Subha, Todeyya’s son, approached the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment mn135:2.2 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

<!-- @segment mn135:3.1 -->

“What is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why even among those who are human beings some are seen to be inferior and superior?

<!-- @segment mn135:3.2 -->

For people are seen who are short-lived and long-lived,

<!-- @segment mn135:3.3 -->

sickly and healthy,

<!-- @segment mn135:3.4 -->

ugly and beautiful,

<!-- @segment mn135:3.5 -->

insignificant and illustrious,

<!-- @segment mn135:3.6 -->

poor and rich,

<!-- @segment mn135:3.7 -->

from low and eminent families,

<!-- @segment mn135:3.8 -->

witless and wise.

<!-- @segment mn135:3.9 -->

What is the reason why even among those who are human beings some are seen to be inferior and superior?”

<!-- @segment mn135:4.1 -->

“Student, sentient beings are the owners of their deeds and heir to their deeds. Deeds are their womb, their relative, and their refuge.

<!-- @segment mn135:4.2 -->

It is deeds that divide beings into

<!-- @segment mn135:4.3 -->

inferior and superior.”

<!-- @segment mn135:4.4 -->

“I don’t understand the meaning of what the worthy Gotama has said in brief, without explaining the details.

<!-- @segment mn135:4.5 -->

Worthy Gotama, please teach me this matter in detail so I can understand the meaning.”

<!-- @segment mn135:4.6 -->

“Well then, student, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment mn135:4.7 -->

“Yes, worthy sir,” replied Subha.

<!-- @segment mn135:4.8 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment mn135:5.1 -->

“Take some woman or man who kills living creatures. They’re violent, bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to living beings.

<!-- @segment mn135:5.2 -->

Because of undertaking such deeds, when their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.

<!-- @segment mn135:5.3 -->

If they’re not reborn in a place of loss, but return to the human realm, then wherever they’re reborn they’re short-lived.

<!-- @segment mn135:5.4 -->

For killing living creatures is the path leading to a short lifespan.

<!-- @segment mn135:5.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:6.1 -->

But take some woman or man who gives up killing living creatures. They renounce the rod and the sword. They’re scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for all living beings.

<!-- @segment mn135:6.2 -->

Because of undertaking such deeds, when their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

<!-- @segment mn135:6.3 -->

If they’re not reborn in a heavenly realm, but return to the human realm, then wherever they’re reborn they’re long-lived.

<!-- @segment mn135:6.4 -->

For not killing living creatures is the path leading to a long lifespan.

<!-- @segment mn135:6.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:7.1 -->

Take some woman or man who habitually hurts living creatures with a fist, stone, rod, or sword.

<!-- @segment mn135:7.2 -->

Because of undertaking such deeds, after death they’re reborn in a place of loss …

<!-- @segment mn135:7.3 -->

or if they return to the human realm, they’re sickly …

<!-- @segment mn135:7.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:7.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:8.1 -->

But take some woman or man who would never hurt living creatures with a fist, stone, rod, or sword.

<!-- @segment mn135:8.2 -->

Because of undertaking such deeds, after death they’re reborn in a heavenly realm …

<!-- @segment mn135:8.3 -->

or if they return to the human realm, they’re healthy …

<!-- @segment mn135:8.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:8.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:9.1 -->

Take some woman or man who is irritable and bad-tempered.

<!-- @segment mn135:9.2 -->

Even when lightly criticized they lose their temper, becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and displaying annoyance, hate, and bitterness.

<!-- @segment mn135:9.3 -->

Because of undertaking such deeds, after death they’re reborn in a place of loss …

<!-- @segment mn135:9.4 -->

or if they return to the human realm, they’re ugly …

<!-- @segment mn135:9.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:9.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:9.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:10.1 -->

But take some woman or man who isn’t irritable and bad-tempered.

<!-- @segment mn135:10.2 -->

Even when heavily criticized, they don’t lose their temper, become annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, or display annoyance, hate, and bitterness.

<!-- @segment mn135:10.3 -->

Because of undertaking such deeds, after death they’re reborn in a heavenly realm …

<!-- @segment mn135:10.4 -->

or if they return to the human realm, they’re lovely …

<!-- @segment mn135:10.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:10.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:10.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:11.1 -->

Take some woman or man who is jealous.

<!-- @segment mn135:11.2 -->

They envy, resent, and begrudge the possessions, honor, respect, reverence, homage, and veneration given to others.

<!-- @segment mn135:11.3 -->

Because of undertaking such deeds, after death they’re reborn in a place of loss …

<!-- @segment mn135:11.4 -->

or if they return to the human realm, they’re insignificant …

<!-- @segment mn135:11.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:11.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:11.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:12.1 -->

But take some woman or man who is not jealous …

<!-- @segment mn135:12.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:12.3 -->

Because of undertaking such deeds, after death they’re reborn in a heavenly realm …

<!-- @segment mn135:12.4 -->

or if they return to the human realm, they’re illustrious …

<!-- @segment mn135:12.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:12.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:12.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:13.1 -->

Take some woman or man who doesn’t give to ascetics or brahmins such things as food, drink, clothing, vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and lighting.

<!-- @segment mn135:13.2 -->

Because of undertaking such deeds, after death they’re reborn in a place of loss …

<!-- @segment mn135:13.3 -->

or if they return to the human realm, they’re poor …

<!-- @segment mn135:13.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:13.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:14.1 -->

But take some woman or man who does give to ascetics or brahmins …

<!-- @segment mn135:14.2 -->

Because of undertaking such deeds, after death they’re reborn in a heavenly realm …

<!-- @segment mn135:14.3 -->

or if they return to the human realm, they’re rich …

<!-- @segment mn135:14.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:14.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:15.1 -->

Take some woman or man who is obstinate and arrogant.

<!-- @segment mn135:15.2 -->

They don’t bow to those they should bow to. They don’t rise up for them, offer them a seat, make way for them, or honor, respect, esteem, or venerate those who are worthy of such.

<!-- @segment mn135:15.3 -->

Because of undertaking such deeds, after death they’re reborn in a place of loss …

<!-- @segment mn135:15.4 -->

or if they return to the human realm, they’re reborn in a low class family …

<!-- @segment mn135:15.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:15.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:15.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:16.1 -->

But take some woman or man who is not obstinate and arrogant …

<!-- @segment mn135:16.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:16.3 -->

Because of undertaking such deeds, after death they’re reborn in a heavenly realm …

<!-- @segment mn135:16.4 -->

or if they return to the human realm, they’re reborn in an eminent family …

<!-- @segment mn135:16.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:16.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:16.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:17.1 -->

Take some woman or man who doesn’t approach an ascetic or brahmin to ask:

<!-- @segment mn135:17.2 -->

‘Sir, what is skillful and what is unskillful?

<!-- @segment mn135:17.3 -->

What is blameworthy and what is blameless?

<!-- @segment mn135:17.4 -->

What should be cultivated and what should not be cultivated?

<!-- @segment mn135:17.5 -->

What kind of action will lead to my lasting harm and suffering? Or what kind of action will lead to my lasting welfare and happiness?’

<!-- @segment mn135:17.6 -->

Because of undertaking such deeds, after death they’re reborn in a place of loss …

<!-- @segment mn135:17.7 -->

or if they return to the human realm, they’re witless …

<!-- @segment mn135:17.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:17.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:17.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:17.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:17.12 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:17.13 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:18.1 -->

But take some woman or man who does approach an ascetic or brahmin to ask:

<!-- @segment mn135:18.2 -->

‘Sir, what is skillful and what is unskillful?

<!-- @segment mn135:18.3 -->

What is blameworthy and what is blameless?

<!-- @segment mn135:18.4 -->

What should be cultivated and what should not be cultivated?

<!-- @segment mn135:18.5 -->

What kind of action will lead to my lasting harm and suffering? Or what kind of action will lead to my lasting welfare and happiness?’

<!-- @segment mn135:18.6 -->

Because of undertaking such deeds, when their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

<!-- @segment mn135:18.7 -->

If they’re not reborn in a heavenly realm, but return to the human realm, then wherever they’re reborn they’re very wise.

<!-- @segment mn135:18.8 -->

For asking questions of ascetics or brahmins is the path leading to wisdom.

<!-- @segment mn135:18.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:18.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:18.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:18.12 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:18.13 -->



<!-- @segment mn135:19.1 -->

So it is the way people live that makes them how they are, whether short-lived or long-lived,

<!-- @segment mn135:19.2 -->

sickly or healthy,

<!-- @segment mn135:19.3 -->

ugly or lovely,

<!-- @segment mn135:19.4 -->

insignificant or illustrious,

<!-- @segment mn135:19.5 -->

poor or rich,

<!-- @segment mn135:19.6 -->

in a low class or eminent family,

<!-- @segment mn135:19.7 -->

or witless or wise.

<!-- @segment mn135:20.1 -->

Sentient beings are the owners of their deeds and heir to their deeds. Deeds are their womb, their relative, and their refuge.

<!-- @segment mn135:20.2 -->

It is deeds that divide beings into

<!-- @segment mn135:20.3 -->

inferior and superior.”

<!-- @segment mn135:21.1 -->

When he had spoken, Subha said to him,

<!-- @segment mn135:21.2 -->

“Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent!

<!-- @segment mn135:21.3 -->

As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, worthy Gotama has made the Teaching clear in many ways.

<!-- @segment mn135:21.4 -->

I go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment mn135:21.5 -->

From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”
