---
slug: mn149
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Great Discourse on What Relates to the Six Sense Fields
---

<!-- @segment mn149:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn149:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment mn149:1.3 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,

<!-- @segment mn149:1.4 -->

“Mendicants!”

<!-- @segment mn149:1.5 -->

“Venerable sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment mn149:1.6 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment mn149:2.1 -->

“Mendicants, I shall teach you the great discourse on what relates to the six sense fields.

<!-- @segment mn149:2.2 -->

Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment mn149:2.3 -->

“Yes, sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment mn149:2.4 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment mn149:3.1 -->

“Mendicants, when you don’t truly know and see the eye, sights, eye consciousness, eye contact, and what is felt as pleasant, painful, or neutral that arises dependent on eye contact, you’re aroused by these things.

<!-- @segment mn149:3.2 -->

Someone who lives aroused like this—fettered, confused, concentrating on gratification—accumulates the five grasping aggregates for themselves in the future.

<!-- @segment mn149:3.3 -->

And their craving—which leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure there wherever it alights—grows.

<!-- @segment mn149:3.4 -->

Their physical and mental stress,

<!-- @segment mn149:3.5 -->

torment,

<!-- @segment mn149:3.6 -->

and fever grow.

<!-- @segment mn149:3.7 -->

And they experience physical and mental suffering.

<!-- @segment mn149:4-7.1 -->

When you don’t truly know and see the ear …

<!-- @segment mn149:4-7.2 -->

nose …

<!-- @segment mn149:4-7.3 -->

tongue …

<!-- @segment mn149:4-7.4 -->

body …

<!-- @segment mn149:4-7.5 -->

mind, ideas, mind consciousness, mind contact, and what is felt as pleasant, painful, or neutral that arises dependent on mind contact, you’re aroused by these things.

<!-- @segment mn149:8.1 -->

Someone who lives aroused like this—fettered, confused, concentrating on gratification—accumulates the five grasping aggregates for themselves in the future.

<!-- @segment mn149:8.2 -->

And their craving—which leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure there wherever it alights—grows.

<!-- @segment mn149:8.3 -->

Their physical and mental stress,

<!-- @segment mn149:8.4 -->

torment,

<!-- @segment mn149:8.5 -->

and fever grow.

<!-- @segment mn149:8.6 -->

And they experience physical and mental suffering.

<!-- @segment mn149:9.1 -->

When you do truly know and see the eye, sights, eye consciousness, eye contact, and what is felt as pleasant, painful, or neutral that arises dependent on eye contact, you’re not aroused by these things.

<!-- @segment mn149:9.2 -->

Someone who lives unaroused like this—unfettered, unconfused, concentrating on drawbacks—disperses the five grasping aggregates for themselves in the future.

<!-- @segment mn149:9.3 -->

And their craving—which leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure there wherever it alights—is given up.

<!-- @segment mn149:9.4 -->

Their physical and mental stress,

<!-- @segment mn149:9.5 -->

torment,

<!-- @segment mn149:9.6 -->

and fever are given up.

<!-- @segment mn149:9.7 -->

And they experience physical and mental pleasure.

<!-- @segment mn149:10.1 -->

The view of such a person is right view.

<!-- @segment mn149:10.2 -->

Their intention is right intention,

<!-- @segment mn149:10.3 -->

their effort is right effort,

<!-- @segment mn149:10.4 -->

their mindfulness is right mindfulness,

<!-- @segment mn149:10.5 -->

and their immersion is right immersion.

<!-- @segment mn149:10.6 -->

And their actions of body and speech, and their livelihood, have already been fully purified before.

<!-- @segment mn149:10.7 -->

So this noble eightfold path is fully developed.

<!-- @segment mn149:10.8 -->

When the noble eightfold path is developed, the following are fully developed: the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, and the seven awakening factors.

<!-- @segment mn149:10.9 -->

And these two qualities proceed in conjunction:

<!-- @segment mn149:10.10 -->

serenity and discernment.

<!-- @segment mn149:10.11 -->

They completely understand by direct knowledge those things that should be completely understood by direct knowledge.

<!-- @segment mn149:10.12 -->

They give up by direct knowledge those things that should be given up by direct knowledge.

<!-- @segment mn149:10.13 -->

They develop by direct knowledge those things that should be developed by direct knowledge.

<!-- @segment mn149:10.14 -->

They realize by direct knowledge those things that should be realized by direct knowledge.

<!-- @segment mn149:11.1 -->

And what are the things that should be completely understood by direct knowledge?

<!-- @segment mn149:11.2 -->

You should say: ‘The five grasping aggregates.’

<!-- @segment mn149:11.3 -->

That is: form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

<!-- @segment mn149:11.4 -->

These are the things that should be completely understood by direct knowledge.

<!-- @segment mn149:11.5 -->

And what are the things that should be given up by direct knowledge?

<!-- @segment mn149:11.6 -->

Ignorance and craving for continued existence.

<!-- @segment mn149:11.7 -->

These are the things that should be given up by direct knowledge.

<!-- @segment mn149:11.8 -->

And what are the things that should be developed by direct knowledge?

<!-- @segment mn149:11.9 -->

Serenity and discernment.

<!-- @segment mn149:11.10 -->

These are the things that should be developed by direct knowledge.

<!-- @segment mn149:11.11 -->

And what are the things that should be realized by direct knowledge?

<!-- @segment mn149:11.12 -->

Knowledge and freedom.

<!-- @segment mn149:11.13 -->

These are the things that should be realized by direct knowledge.

<!-- @segment mn149:12-18.1 -->

When you truly know and see the ear …

<!-- @segment mn149:12-18.2 -->

nose …

<!-- @segment mn149:12-18.3 -->

tongue …

<!-- @segment mn149:12-18.4 -->

body …

<!-- @segment mn149:12-18.5 -->

mind, ideas, mind consciousness, mind contact, and what is felt as pleasant, painful, or neutral that arises dependent on mind contact, you are not aroused by these things. …

<!-- @segment mn149:19.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:19.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:19.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:19.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:19.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:19.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:20.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:20.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:20.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:20.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:20.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:20.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:20.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:21.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:22.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:22.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:22.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:22.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:22.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:22.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:23.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:23.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:23.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:23.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:24.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:24.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:24.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:25.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:25.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:25.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:26.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:26.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn149:26.3 -->

These are the things that should be realized by direct knowledge.”

<!-- @segment mn149:26.4 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn149:26.5 -->

Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said.
