---
slug: mn140
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Analysis of the Elements
---

<!-- @segment mn140:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn140:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was wandering in the Magadhan lands when he arrived at Rājagaha.

<!-- @segment mn140:1.3 -->

He went to see Bhaggava the potter, and said,

<!-- @segment mn140:2.1 -->

“Bhaggava, if it is no trouble, I’d like to spend a single night in your workshop.”

<!-- @segment mn140:2.2 -->

“It’s no trouble, sir.

<!-- @segment mn140:2.3 -->

But there’s a renunciate already staying there.

<!-- @segment mn140:2.4 -->

If he allows it, sir, you may stay as long as you please.”

<!-- @segment mn140:3.1 -->

Now at that time a gentleman named Pukkusāti had gone forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness in the Buddha’s name.

<!-- @segment mn140:3.2 -->

And it was he who had first taken up residence in the workshop.

<!-- @segment mn140:3.3 -->

Then the Buddha approached Venerable Pukkusāti and said,

<!-- @segment mn140:3.4 -->

“Mendicant, if it is no trouble, I’d like to spend a single night in the workshop.”

<!-- @segment mn140:3.5 -->

“The potter’s workshop is spacious, reverend.

<!-- @segment mn140:3.6 -->

Stay as long as you please.”

<!-- @segment mn140:4.1 -->

Then the Buddha entered the workshop and spread out a grass mat to one side. He sat down cross-legged, set his body straight, and brought mindfulness to the present.

<!-- @segment mn140:4.2 -->

He spent much of the night sitting in meditation,

<!-- @segment mn140:4.3 -->

and so did Pukkusāti.

<!-- @segment mn140:4.4 -->

Then it occurred to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn140:4.5 -->

“This gentleman’s behavior is impressive.

<!-- @segment mn140:4.6 -->

Why don’t I question him?”

<!-- @segment mn140:4.7 -->

So the Buddha said to Pukkusāti,

<!-- @segment mn140:5.1 -->

“In whose name have you gone forth, mendicant? Who is your Teacher? Whose teaching do you believe in?”

<!-- @segment mn140:5.2 -->

“Reverend, there is the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family.

<!-- @segment mn140:5.3 -->

He has this good reputation:

<!-- @segment mn140:5.4 -->

‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’

<!-- @segment mn140:5.5 -->

I’ve gone forth in his name.

<!-- @segment mn140:5.6 -->

That Blessed One is my Teacher,

<!-- @segment mn140:5.7 -->

and I believe in his teaching.”

<!-- @segment mn140:5.8 -->

“But mendicant, where is the Blessed One at present, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha?”

<!-- @segment mn140:5.9 -->

“In the northern lands there is a city named Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment mn140:5.10 -->

There the Blessed One is now staying, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha.”

<!-- @segment mn140:5.11 -->

“But have you ever seen that Buddha?

<!-- @segment mn140:5.12 -->

Would you recognize him if you saw him?”

<!-- @segment mn140:5.13 -->

“No, I’ve never seen him,

<!-- @segment mn140:5.14 -->

and I wouldn’t recognize him if I did.”

<!-- @segment mn140:6.1 -->

Then it occurred to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn140:6.2 -->

“This gentleman has gone forth in my name.

<!-- @segment mn140:6.3 -->

Why don’t I teach him the Dhamma?”

<!-- @segment mn140:6.4 -->

So the Buddha said to Pukkusāti,

<!-- @segment mn140:6.5 -->

“Mendicant, I shall teach you the Dhamma.

<!-- @segment mn140:6.6 -->

Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment mn140:6.7 -->

“Yes, reverend,” replied Pukkusāti.

<!-- @segment mn140:6.8 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment mn140:7.1 -->

“‘This person has six elements, six fields of contact, eighteen mental preoccupations, and four foundations.

<!-- @segment mn140:7.2 -->

Where they stand, the streams of conceiving do not flow. And where the streams of conceiving do not flow, they are called a sage at peace.

<!-- @segment mn140:7.3 -->

Do not neglect wisdom; preserve truth; foster generosity; and train only for peace.’

<!-- @segment mn140:7.4 -->

This is the summary recital for the analysis of the elements.

<!-- @segment mn140:8.1 -->

‘This person has six elements.’

<!-- @segment mn140:8.2 -->

That’s what I said, but why did I say it?

<!-- @segment mn140:8.3 -->

There are these six elements:

<!-- @segment mn140:8.4 -->

the elements of earth, water, fire, air, space, and consciousness.

<!-- @segment mn140:8.5 -->

‘This person has six elements.’

<!-- @segment mn140:8.6 -->

That’s what I said, and this is why I said it.

<!-- @segment mn140:9.1 -->

‘This person has six fields of contact.’

<!-- @segment mn140:9.2 -->

That’s what I said, but why did I say it?

<!-- @segment mn140:9.3 -->

The fields of contact of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind.

<!-- @segment mn140:9.4 -->

‘This person has six fields of contact.’

<!-- @segment mn140:9.5 -->

That’s what I said, and this is why I said it.

<!-- @segment mn140:10.1 -->

‘This person has eighteen mental preoccupations.’

<!-- @segment mn140:10.2 -->

That’s what I said, but why did I say it?

<!-- @segment mn140:10.3 -->

Seeing a sight with the eye, one is preoccupied with a sight that’s a basis for happiness or sadness or equanimity.

<!-- @segment mn140:10.4 -->

Hearing a sound with the ear …

<!-- @segment mn140:10.5 -->

Smelling an odor with the nose …

<!-- @segment mn140:10.6 -->

Tasting a flavor with the tongue …

<!-- @segment mn140:10.7 -->

Encountering a touch with the body …

<!-- @segment mn140:10.8 -->

Becoming conscious of an idea with the mind, one is preoccupied with an idea that’s a basis for happiness or sadness or equanimity.

<!-- @segment mn140:10.9 -->

So there are six preoccupations with happiness, six preoccupations with sadness, and six preoccupations with equanimity.

<!-- @segment mn140:10.10 -->

‘This person has eighteen mental preoccupations.’

<!-- @segment mn140:10.11 -->

That’s what I said, and this is why I said it.

<!-- @segment mn140:11.1 -->

‘This person has four foundations.’

<!-- @segment mn140:11.2 -->

That’s what I said, but why did I say it?

<!-- @segment mn140:11.3 -->

The foundations of wisdom, truth, generosity, and peace.

<!-- @segment mn140:11.4 -->

‘This person has four foundations.’

<!-- @segment mn140:11.5 -->

That’s what I said, and this is why I said it.

<!-- @segment mn140:12.1 -->

‘Do not neglect wisdom; preserve truth; foster generosity; and train only for peace.’

<!-- @segment mn140:12.2 -->

That’s what I said, but why did I say it?

<!-- @segment mn140:13.1 -->

And how does one not neglect wisdom?

<!-- @segment mn140:13.2 -->

There are these six elements:

<!-- @segment mn140:13.3 -->

the elements of earth, water, fire, air, space, and consciousness.

<!-- @segment mn140:14.1 -->

And what is the earth element?

<!-- @segment mn140:14.2 -->

The earth element may be interior or exterior.

<!-- @segment mn140:14.3 -->

And what is the interior earth element?

<!-- @segment mn140:14.4 -->

Anything internal, personal, that’s hard, solid, and appropriated. This includes:

<!-- @segment mn140:14.5 -->

head hair, body hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, undigested food, feces, or anything else internal, personal, that’s hard, solid, and appropriated.

<!-- @segment mn140:14.6 -->

This is called the interior earth element.

<!-- @segment mn140:14.7 -->

The interior earth element and the exterior earth element are just the earth element.

<!-- @segment mn140:14.8 -->

This should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

<!-- @segment mn140:14.9 -->

When you truly see with right understanding, you grow disillusioned with the earth element, detaching the mind from the earth element.

<!-- @segment mn140:15.1 -->

And what is the water element?

<!-- @segment mn140:15.2 -->

The water element may be interior or exterior.

<!-- @segment mn140:15.3 -->

And what is the interior water element?

<!-- @segment mn140:15.4 -->

Anything internal, personal, that’s water, watery, and appropriated. This includes:

<!-- @segment mn140:15.5 -->

bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva, snot, synovial fluid, urine, or anything else internal, personal, that’s water, watery, and appropriated.

<!-- @segment mn140:15.6 -->

This is called the interior water element.

<!-- @segment mn140:15.7 -->

The interior water element and the exterior water element are just the water element.

<!-- @segment mn140:15.8 -->

This should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

<!-- @segment mn140:15.9 -->

When you truly see with right understanding, you grow disillusioned with the water element, detaching the mind from the water element.

<!-- @segment mn140:16.1 -->

And what is the fire element?

<!-- @segment mn140:16.2 -->

The fire element may be interior or exterior.

<!-- @segment mn140:16.3 -->

And what is the interior fire element?

<!-- @segment mn140:16.4 -->

Anything internal, personal, that’s fire, fiery, and appropriated. This includes:

<!-- @segment mn140:16.5 -->

that which warms, that which ages, that which heats you up when feverish, that which properly digests food and drink; or anything else internal, personal, that’s fire, fiery, and appropriated.

<!-- @segment mn140:16.6 -->

This is called the interior fire element.

<!-- @segment mn140:16.7 -->

The interior fire element and the exterior fire element are just the fire element.

<!-- @segment mn140:16.8 -->

This should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

<!-- @segment mn140:16.9 -->

When you truly see with right understanding, you grow disillusioned with the fire element, detaching the mind from the fire element.

<!-- @segment mn140:17.1 -->

And what is the air element?

<!-- @segment mn140:17.2 -->

The air element may be interior or exterior.

<!-- @segment mn140:17.3 -->

And what is the interior air element?

<!-- @segment mn140:17.4 -->

Anything internal, personal, that’s air, airy, and appropriated. This includes:

<!-- @segment mn140:17.5 -->

winds that go up or down, winds in the belly or the bowels, winds that flow through the limbs, in-breaths and out-breaths; or anything else internal, personal, that’s air, airy, and appropriated.

<!-- @segment mn140:17.6 -->

This is called the interior air element.

<!-- @segment mn140:17.7 -->

The interior air element and the exterior air element are just the air element.

<!-- @segment mn140:17.8 -->

This should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

<!-- @segment mn140:17.9 -->

When you truly see with right understanding, you grow disillusioned with the air element, detaching the mind from the air element.

<!-- @segment mn140:18.1 -->

And what is the space element?

<!-- @segment mn140:18.2 -->

The space element may be interior or exterior.

<!-- @segment mn140:18.3 -->

And what is the interior space element?

<!-- @segment mn140:18.4 -->

Anything internal, personal, that’s space, spacious, and appropriated. This includes:

<!-- @segment mn140:18.5 -->

the ear canals, nostrils, and mouth; and the space for swallowing what is eaten and drunk, the space where it stays, and the space for excreting it from the nether regions; or anything else internal, personal, that’s space, spacious, and appropriated.

<!-- @segment mn140:18.6 -->

This is called the interior space element.

<!-- @segment mn140:18.7 -->

The interior space element and the exterior space element are just the space element.

<!-- @segment mn140:18.8 -->

This should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

<!-- @segment mn140:18.9 -->

When you truly see with right understanding, you grow disillusioned with the space element, detaching the mind from the space element.

<!-- @segment mn140:19.1 -->

What remains is sheer consciousness, pure and bright.

<!-- @segment mn140:19.2 -->

And what does that consciousness know?

<!-- @segment mn140:19.3 -->

It cognizes ‘pleasure’ and ‘pain’ and ‘neutral’.

<!-- @segment mn140:19.4 -->

Pleasant feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as pleasant.

<!-- @segment mn140:19.5 -->

When they feel a pleasant feeling, they know: ‘I feel a pleasant feeling.’

<!-- @segment mn140:19.6 -->

They know: ‘With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as pleasant, the corresponding pleasant feeling ceases and stops.’

<!-- @segment mn140:19.7 -->

Painful feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as painful.

<!-- @segment mn140:19.8 -->

When they feel a painful feeling, they know: ‘I feel a painful feeling.’

<!-- @segment mn140:19.9 -->

They know: ‘With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as painful, the corresponding painful feeling ceases and stops.’

<!-- @segment mn140:19.10 -->

Neutral feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as neutral.

<!-- @segment mn140:19.11 -->

When they feel a neutral feeling, they know: ‘I feel a neutral feeling.’

<!-- @segment mn140:19.12 -->

They know: ‘With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as neutral, the corresponding neutral feeling ceases and stops.’

<!-- @segment mn140:19.13 -->

When you rub two sticks together, heat is generated and fire is produced. But when you part the sticks and lay them aside, any corresponding heat ceases and stops.

<!-- @segment mn140:19.14 -->

In the same way, pleasant feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as pleasant. …

<!-- @segment mn140:19.15 -->



<!-- @segment mn140:19.16 -->



<!-- @segment mn140:19.17 -->



<!-- @segment mn140:19.18 -->



<!-- @segment mn140:19.19 -->



<!-- @segment mn140:19.20 -->



<!-- @segment mn140:19.21 -->



<!-- @segment mn140:19.22 -->

They know: ‘With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as neutral, the corresponding neutral feeling ceases and stops.’

<!-- @segment mn140:20.1 -->

There remains only equanimity, pure, bright, pliable, workable, and radiant.

<!-- @segment mn140:20.2 -->

It’s like when a deft goldsmith or a goldsmith’s apprentice prepares a forge, fires the crucible, picks up some native gold with tongs and puts it in the crucible. From time to time they fan it, from time to time they sprinkle water on it, and from time to time they just watch over it. That native gold becomes pliable, workable, and radiant, not brittle, and is ready to be worked. Then the goldsmith can successfully create any kind of ornament they want, whether a bracelet, earrings, a necklace, or a golden garland.

<!-- @segment mn140:20.3 -->

In the same way, there remains only equanimity, pure, bright, pliable, workable, and radiant.

<!-- @segment mn140:21.1 -->

They understand:

<!-- @segment mn140:21.2 -->

‘If I were to apply this equanimity, so pure and bright, to the dimension of infinite space, and develop my mind accordingly,

<!-- @segment mn140:21.3 -->

this equanimity of mine, relying on that and grasping it, would remain for a very long time.

<!-- @segment mn140:21.4 -->

If I were to apply this equanimity, so pure and bright, to the dimension of infinite consciousness, and develop my mind accordingly,

<!-- @segment mn140:21.5 -->

this equanimity of mine, relying on that and grasping it, would remain for a very long time.

<!-- @segment mn140:21.6 -->

If I were to apply this equanimity, so pure and bright, to the dimension of nothingness, and develop my mind accordingly,

<!-- @segment mn140:21.7 -->

this equanimity of mine, relying on that and grasping it, would remain for a very long time.

<!-- @segment mn140:21.8 -->

If I were to apply this equanimity, so pure and bright, to the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, and develop my mind accordingly,

<!-- @segment mn140:21.9 -->

this equanimity of mine, relying on that and grasping it, would remain for a very long time.’

<!-- @segment mn140:22.1 -->

They understand:

<!-- @segment mn140:22.2 -->

‘If I were to apply this equanimity, so pure and bright, to the dimension of infinite space, my mind would develop accordingly.

<!-- @segment mn140:22.3 -->

But that is conditioned.

<!-- @segment mn140:22.4 -->

If I were to apply this equanimity, so pure and bright, to the dimension of infinite consciousness …

<!-- @segment mn140:22.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn140:22.6 -->

nothingness …

<!-- @segment mn140:22.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn140:22.8 -->

neither perception nor non-perception, my mind would develop accordingly.

<!-- @segment mn140:22.9 -->

But that is conditioned.’

<!-- @segment mn140:22.10 -->

They neither make a choice nor form an intention for existence or nonexistence.

<!-- @segment mn140:22.11 -->

Because of this, they don’t grasp at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment mn140:22.12 -->

Not grasping, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished.

<!-- @segment mn140:22.13 -->

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’

<!-- @segment mn140:23.1 -->

If they feel a pleasant feeling, they understand that it’s impermanent, that they’re not attached to it, and that they don’t take pleasure in it.

<!-- @segment mn140:23.2 -->

If they feel a painful feeling, they understand that it’s impermanent, that they’re not attached to it, and that they don’t take pleasure in it.

<!-- @segment mn140:23.3 -->

If they feel a neutral feeling, they understand that it’s impermanent, that they’re not attached to it, and that they don’t take pleasure in it.

<!-- @segment mn140:24.1 -->

If they feel a pleasant feeling, they feel it detached.

<!-- @segment mn140:24.2 -->

If they feel a painful feeling, they feel it detached.

<!-- @segment mn140:24.3 -->

If they feel a neutral feeling, they feel it detached.

<!-- @segment mn140:24.4 -->

Feeling the end of the body draw close, they understand: ‘I feel the end of the body draw close.’ Feeling the end of life draw close, they understand: ‘I feel the end of life draw close.’

<!-- @segment mn140:24.5 -->

They understand: ‘When my body breaks up and my life has come to an end, everything that’s felt, since I no longer take pleasure in it, will become cool right here.’

<!-- @segment mn140:24.6 -->

Suppose an oil lamp depended on oil and a wick to burn.

<!-- @segment mn140:24.7 -->

As the oil and the wick are used up, it would be extinguished due to not being fed.

<!-- @segment mn140:24.8 -->

In the same way, feeling the end of the body draw close, they understand: ‘I feel the end of the body draw close.’ Feeling the end of life draw close, they understand: ‘I feel the end of life draw close.’

<!-- @segment mn140:24.9 -->

They understand: ‘When my body breaks up and my life has come to an end, everything that’s felt, since I no longer take pleasure in it, will become cool right here.’

<!-- @segment mn140:25.1 -->

Therefore a mendicant thus endowed is endowed with the ultimate foundation of wisdom.

<!-- @segment mn140:25.2 -->

For this is the ultimate noble wisdom, namely,

<!-- @segment mn140:25.3 -->

the knowledge of the ending of all suffering.

<!-- @segment mn140:26.1 -->

Their freedom, being founded on truth, is unshakable.

<!-- @segment mn140:26.2 -->

For that which is false has a deceptive nature, while that which is true has an undeceptive nature—extinguishment.

<!-- @segment mn140:26.3 -->

Therefore a mendicant thus endowed is endowed with the ultimate foundation of truth.

<!-- @segment mn140:26.4 -->

For this is the ultimate noble truth, namely,

<!-- @segment mn140:26.5 -->

that which has an undeceptive nature—extinguishment.

<!-- @segment mn140:27.1 -->

In their ignorance, they used to acquire attachments.

<!-- @segment mn140:27.2 -->

Those have been cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated so they are unable to arise in the future.

<!-- @segment mn140:27.3 -->

Therefore a mendicant thus endowed is endowed with the ultimate foundation of generosity.

<!-- @segment mn140:27.4 -->

For this is the ultimate noble generosity, namely,

<!-- @segment mn140:27.5 -->

letting go of all attachments.

<!-- @segment mn140:28.1 -->

In their ignorance, they used to be covetous, full of desire and lust.

<!-- @segment mn140:28.2 -->

That has been cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated so it’s unable to arise in the future.

<!-- @segment mn140:28.3 -->

In their ignorance, they used to be contemptuous, full of ill will and malevolence.

<!-- @segment mn140:28.4 -->

That has been cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated so it’s unable to arise in the future.

<!-- @segment mn140:28.5 -->

In their ignorance, they used to be ignorant, full of delusion.

<!-- @segment mn140:28.6 -->

That has been cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated so it’s unable to arise in the future.

<!-- @segment mn140:28.7 -->

Therefore a mendicant thus endowed is endowed with the ultimate foundation of peace.

<!-- @segment mn140:28.8 -->

For this is the ultimate noble peace, namely,

<!-- @segment mn140:28.9 -->

the pacification of greed, hate, and delusion.

<!-- @segment mn140:29.1 -->

‘Do not neglect wisdom; preserve truth; foster generosity; and train only for peace.’

<!-- @segment mn140:29.2 -->

That’s what I said, and this is why I said it.

<!-- @segment mn140:30.1 -->

‘Where they stand, the streams of conceiving do not flow. And where the streams of conceiving do not flow, they are called a sage at peace.’

<!-- @segment mn140:30.2 -->

That’s what I said, but why did I say it?

<!-- @segment mn140:31.1 -->

These are all forms of conceiving: ‘I am’, ‘I am this’, ‘I will be’, ‘I will not be’, ‘I will have form’, ‘I will be formless’, ‘I will be percipient’, ‘I will be non-percipient’, ‘I will be neither percipient nor non-percipient.’

<!-- @segment mn140:31.2 -->

Conceiving is a disease, a boil, a dart.

<!-- @segment mn140:31.3 -->

Having gone beyond all conceiving, one is called a sage at peace.

<!-- @segment mn140:31.4 -->

The sage at peace is not reborn, does not grow old, and does not die. They are not shaken, and do not yearn.

<!-- @segment mn140:31.5 -->

For they have nothing which would cause them to be reborn. Not being reborn, how could they grow old? Not growing old, how could they die? Not dying, how could they be shaken? Not shaking, for what could they yearn?

<!-- @segment mn140:32.1 -->

‘Where they stand, the streams of conceiving do not flow. And where the streams of conceiving do not flow, they are called a sage at peace.’

<!-- @segment mn140:32.2 -->

That’s what I said, and this is why I said it.

<!-- @segment mn140:32.3 -->

Mendicant, you should remember this brief analysis of the six elements.”

<!-- @segment mn140:33.1 -->

Then Venerable Pukkusāti thought,

<!-- @segment mn140:33.2 -->

“It seems the Teacher has come to me! The Holy One has come to me! The fully awakened Buddha has come to me!” He rose from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, bowed with his head at the Buddha’s feet, and said,

<!-- @segment mn140:33.3 -->

“I made a mistake, sir. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of me to presume to address the Buddha as ‘reverend’.

<!-- @segment mn140:33.4 -->

Please, sir, accept my mistake for what it is, so I will restrain myself in future.”

<!-- @segment mn140:33.5 -->

“Indeed, mendicant, you made a mistake. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of you to act in that way.

<!-- @segment mn140:33.6 -->

But since you have recognized your mistake for what it is, and have dealt with it properly, I accept it.

<!-- @segment mn140:33.7 -->

For it is growth in the training of the Noble One to recognize a mistake for what it is, deal with it properly, and commit to restraint in the future.”

<!-- @segment mn140:34.1 -->

“Sir, may I receive the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha’s presence?”

<!-- @segment mn140:34.2 -->

“But mendicant, do you have a full set of bowl and robes?”

<!-- @segment mn140:34.3 -->

“No, sir, I do not.”

<!-- @segment mn140:34.4 -->

“The Realized Ones do not ordain those without a full set of bowl and robes.”

<!-- @segment mn140:35.1 -->

And then Venerable Pukkusāti approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. He rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

<!-- @segment mn140:35.2 -->

But while he was wandering in search of a bowl and robes, a stray cow took his life.

<!-- @segment mn140:36.1 -->

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn140:36.2 -->

“Sir, the gentleman named Pukkusāti, who was advised in brief by the Buddha, has passed away.

<!-- @segment mn140:36.3 -->

Where has he been reborn in his next life?”

<!-- @segment mn140:36.4 -->

“Mendicants, Pukkusāti was astute. He practiced in line with the teaching, and did not trouble me about the teachings.

<!-- @segment mn140:36.5 -->

With the ending of the five lower fetters, he’s been reborn spontaneously and will become extinguished there, not liable to return from that world.”

<!-- @segment mn140:36.6 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn140:36.7 -->

Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said.
