---
slug: mn142
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Analysis of Religious Donations
---

<!-- @segment mn142:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn142:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery.

<!-- @segment mn142:2.1 -->

Then Mahāpajāpati Gotamī approached the Buddha bringing a new pair of garments. She bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn142:2.2 -->

“Sir, I have spun and woven this new pair of garments specially for the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn142:2.3 -->

May the Buddha please accept this from me out of sympathy.”

<!-- @segment mn142:2.4 -->

When she said this, the Buddha said to her,

<!-- @segment mn142:2.5 -->

“Give it to the Saṅgha, Gotamī.

<!-- @segment mn142:2.6 -->

When you give to the Saṅgha, both the Saṅgha and I will be honored.”

<!-- @segment mn142:2.7 -->

For a second time …

<!-- @segment mn142:2.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn142:2.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn142:2.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn142:2.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn142:2.12 -->



<!-- @segment mn142:2.13 -->

For a third time, Mahāpajāpati Gotamī said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn142:2.14 -->

“Sir, I have spun and woven this new pair of garments specially for the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn142:2.15 -->

May the Buddha please accept this from me out of sympathy.”

<!-- @segment mn142:2.16 -->

And for a third time, the Buddha said to her,

<!-- @segment mn142:2.17 -->

“Give it to the Saṅgha, Gotamī.

<!-- @segment mn142:2.18 -->

When you give to the Saṅgha, both the Saṅgha and I will be honored.”

<!-- @segment mn142:3.1 -->

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn142:3.2 -->

“Sir, please accept the new pair of garments from Mahāpajāpati Gotamī.

<!-- @segment mn142:3.3 -->

Sir, Mahāpajāpati was very helpful to the Buddha. As his aunt, she raised him, nurtured him, and gave him her milk.

<!-- @segment mn142:3.4 -->

When the Buddha’s birth mother passed away, she nurtured him at her own breast.

<!-- @segment mn142:3.5 -->

And the Buddha has been very helpful to Mahāpajāpati.

<!-- @segment mn142:3.6 -->

It is owing to the Buddha that Mahāpajāpati has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment mn142:3.7 -->

It’s owing to the Buddha that she refrains from killing living creatures, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, and intoxicants of beer, wine, and liquor.

<!-- @segment mn142:3.8 -->

It’s owing to the Buddha that she has experiential confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and has the ethics loved by the noble ones.

<!-- @segment mn142:3.9 -->

It’s owing to the Buddha that she is free of doubt regarding suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation.

<!-- @segment mn142:3.10 -->

The Buddha has been very helpful to Mahāpajāpati.”

<!-- @segment mn142:4.1 -->

“That’s so true, Ānanda.

<!-- @segment mn142:4.2 -->

When someone has enabled you to go for refuge, it’s not easy to repay them

<!-- @segment mn142:4.3 -->

by bowing down to them, rising up for them, greeting them with cupped palms, and observing proper etiquette for them; or by providing them with robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.

<!-- @segment mn142:4.4 -->

When someone has enabled you to refrain from killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, and intoxicants of beer, wine, and liquor, it’s not easy to repay them …

<!-- @segment mn142:4.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn142:4.6 -->

When someone has enabled you to have experiential confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and the ethics loved by the noble ones, it’s not easy to repay them …

<!-- @segment mn142:4.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn142:4.8 -->

When someone has enabled you to be free of doubt regarding suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation, it’s not easy to repay them

<!-- @segment mn142:4.9 -->

by bowing down to them, rising up for them, greeting them with cupped palms, and observing proper etiquette for them; or by providing them with robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.1 -->

Ānanda, there are these fourteen religious donations to individuals.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.2 -->

What fourteen?

<!-- @segment mn142:5.3 -->

One gives a gift to the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.4 -->

This is the first religious donation to an individual.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.5 -->

One gives a gift to an independent Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.6 -->

This is the second religious donation to an individual.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.7 -->

One gives a gift to a perfected one.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.8 -->

This is the third religious donation to an individual.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.9 -->

One gives a gift to someone practicing to realize the fruit of perfection.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.10 -->

This is the fourth religious donation to an individual.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.11 -->

One gives a gift to a non-returner.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.12 -->

This is the fifth religious donation to an individual.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.13 -->

One gives a gift to someone practicing to realize the fruit of non-return.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.14 -->

This is the sixth religious donation to an individual.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.15 -->

One gives a gift to a once-returner.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.16 -->

This is the seventh religious donation to an individual.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.17 -->

One gives a gift to someone practicing to realize the fruit of once-return.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.18 -->

This is the eighth religious donation to an individual.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.19 -->

One gives a gift to a stream-enterer.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.20 -->

This is the ninth religious donation to an individual.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.21 -->

One gives a gift to someone practicing to realize the fruit of stream-entry.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.22 -->

This is the tenth religious donation to an individual.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.23 -->

One gives a gift to an outsider who is free of desire for sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.24 -->

This is the eleventh religious donation to an individual.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.25 -->

One gives a gift to an ordinary person who has good ethical conduct.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.26 -->

This is the twelfth religious donation to an individual.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.27 -->

One gives a gift to an ordinary person who has bad ethical conduct.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.28 -->

This is the thirteenth religious donation to an individual.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.29 -->

One gives a gift to an animal.

<!-- @segment mn142:5.30 -->

This is the fourteenth religious donation to an individual.

<!-- @segment mn142:6.1 -->

Now, Ānanda, gifts to the following persons may be expected to yield the following returns. To an animal, a hundred times. To an unethical ordinary person, a thousand. To an ethical ordinary person, a hundred thousand. To an outsider free of desire for sensual pleasures, 10,000,000,000. But a gift to someone practicing to realize the fruit of stream-entry may be expected to yield incalculable, immeasurable returns. How much more so a gift to a stream-enterer, someone practicing to realize the fruit of once-return, a once-returner, someone practicing to realize the fruit of non-return, a non-returner, someone practicing to realize the fruit of perfection, a perfected one, or an independent Buddha? How much more so a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha?

<!-- @segment mn142:7.1 -->

But there are, Ānanda, seven religious donations bestowed on a Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment mn142:7.2 -->

What seven?

<!-- @segment mn142:7.3 -->

One gives a gift to the communities of both monks and nuns headed by the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn142:7.4 -->

This is the first religious donation bestowed on a Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment mn142:7.5 -->

One gives a gift to the communities of both monks and nuns after the Buddha has finally become quenched.

<!-- @segment mn142:7.6 -->

This is the second religious donation bestowed on a Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment mn142:7.7 -->

One gives a gift to the Saṅgha of monks.

<!-- @segment mn142:7.8 -->

This is the third religious donation bestowed on a Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment mn142:7.9 -->

One gives a gift to the Saṅgha of nuns.

<!-- @segment mn142:7.10 -->

This is the fourth religious donation bestowed on a Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment mn142:7.11 -->

One gives a gift, thinking: ‘Appoint this many monks and nuns for me from the Saṅgha.’

<!-- @segment mn142:7.12 -->

This is the fifth religious donation bestowed on a Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment mn142:7.13 -->

One gives a gift, thinking: ‘Appoint this many monks for me from the Saṅgha.’

<!-- @segment mn142:7.14 -->

This is the sixth religious donation bestowed on a Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment mn142:7.15 -->

One gives a gift, thinking: ‘Appoint this many nuns for me from the Saṅgha.’

<!-- @segment mn142:7.16 -->

This is the seventh religious donation bestowed on a Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment mn142:8.1 -->

In times to come there will be lambs of the flock wearing a scrap of ocher cloth, unethical and of bad character.

<!-- @segment mn142:8.2 -->

People will give gifts to those unethical people in the name of the Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment mn142:8.3 -->

Then too, I say, a religious donation bestowed on the Saṅgha is incalculable and immeasurable.

<!-- @segment mn142:8.4 -->

But in any case, there is no way a personal offering can be more fruitful than one bestowed on a Saṅgha, I say.

<!-- @segment mn142:9.1 -->

Ānanda, there are these four ways of purifying a religious donation.

<!-- @segment mn142:9.2 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment mn142:9.3 -->

There’s a religious donation that’s purified by the giver, not the recipient.

<!-- @segment mn142:9.4 -->

There’s a religious donation that’s purified by the recipient, not the giver.

<!-- @segment mn142:9.5 -->

There’s a religious donation that’s purified by neither the giver nor the recipient.

<!-- @segment mn142:9.6 -->

There’s a religious donation that’s purified by both the giver and the recipient.

<!-- @segment mn142:10.1 -->

And how is a religious donation purified by the giver, not the recipient?

<!-- @segment mn142:10.2 -->

It’s when the giver is ethical, of good character, but the recipient is unethical, of bad character.

<!-- @segment mn142:10.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn142:11.1 -->

And how is a religious donation purified by the recipient, not the giver?

<!-- @segment mn142:11.2 -->

It’s when the giver is unethical, of bad character, but the recipient is ethical, of good character.

<!-- @segment mn142:11.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn142:12.1 -->

And how is a religious donation purified by neither the giver nor the recipient?

<!-- @segment mn142:12.2 -->

It’s when both the giver and the recipient are unethical, of bad character.

<!-- @segment mn142:12.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn142:13.1 -->

And how is a religious donation purified by both the giver and the recipient?

<!-- @segment mn142:13.2 -->

It’s when both the giver and the recipient are ethical, of good character.

<!-- @segment mn142:13.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn142:13.4 -->

These are the four ways of purifying a religious donation.”

<!-- @segment mn142:14.1 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn142:14.2 -->

Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

<!-- @segment mn142:14.3 -->

“When an ethical person with trusting heart

<!-- @segment mn142:14.4 -->

gives a proper gift to unethical persons,

<!-- @segment mn142:14.5 -->

trusting in the ample fruit of deeds,

<!-- @segment mn142:14.6 -->

that offering is purified by the giver.

<!-- @segment mn142:14.7 -->

When an unethical and untrusting person,

<!-- @segment mn142:14.8 -->

gives an improper gift to ethical persons,

<!-- @segment mn142:14.9 -->

not trusting in the ample fruit of deeds,

<!-- @segment mn142:14.10 -->

that offering is purified by the receivers.

<!-- @segment mn142:14.11 -->

When an unethical and untrusting person,

<!-- @segment mn142:14.12 -->

gives an improper gift to unethical persons,

<!-- @segment mn142:14.13 -->

not trusting in the ample fruit of deeds,

<!-- @segment mn142:14.14 -->

I declare that gift is not very fruitful.

<!-- @segment mn142:14.15 -->

When an ethical person with trusting heart

<!-- @segment mn142:14.16 -->

gives a proper gift to ethical persons,

<!-- @segment mn142:14.17 -->

trusting in the ample fruit of deeds,

<!-- @segment mn142:14.18 -->

I declare that gift is abundantly fruitful.

<!-- @segment mn142:14.19 -->

But when a passionless one gives to the passionless

<!-- @segment mn142:14.20 -->

a proper gift with trusting heart,

<!-- @segment mn142:14.21 -->

trusting in the ample fruit of deeds,

<!-- @segment mn142:14.22 -->

that’s truly the best of material gifts.”

<!-- @segment mn142:14.23 -->



<!-- @segment mn142:14.24 -->



<!-- @segment mn142:15.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn142:15.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn142:15.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn142:15.4 -->
