---
slug: mn141
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Analysis of the Truths
---

<!-- @segment mn141:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn141:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Varanasi, in the deer park at Isipatana.

<!-- @segment mn141:1.3 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,

<!-- @segment mn141:1.4 -->

“Mendicants!”

<!-- @segment mn141:1.5 -->

“Venerable sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment mn141:1.6 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment mn141:2.1 -->

“Near Varanasi, in the deer park at Isipatana, the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha rolled forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma. And that wheel cannot be rolled back by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or divinity or by anyone in the world.

<!-- @segment mn141:2.2 -->

It is the teaching, advocating, establishing, clarifying, analyzing, and revealing of the four noble truths.

<!-- @segment mn141:2.3 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment mn141:3.1 -->

The noble truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.

<!-- @segment mn141:4.1 -->

Near Varanasi, in the deer park at Isipatana, the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha rolled forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma. And that wheel cannot be rolled back by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or divinity or by anyone in the world.

<!-- @segment mn141:4.2 -->

It is the teaching, advocating, establishing, clarifying, analyzing, and revealing of the four noble truths.

<!-- @segment mn141:5.1 -->

Mendicants, you should cultivate friendship with Sāriputta and Moggallāna.

<!-- @segment mn141:5.2 -->

You should associate with Sāriputta and Moggallāna.

<!-- @segment mn141:5.3 -->

They’re astute, and they support their spiritual companions.

<!-- @segment mn141:5.4 -->

Sāriputta is like one who gives birth,

<!-- @segment mn141:5.5 -->

while Moggallāna is like one who raises the child.

<!-- @segment mn141:5.6 -->

Sāriputta guides people to the fruit of stream-entry, Moggallāna to the highest goal.

<!-- @segment mn141:5.7 -->

Sāriputta is able to explain, teach, assert, establish, clarify, analyze, and reveal the four noble truths in detail.”

<!-- @segment mn141:6.1 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn141:6.2 -->

When he had spoken, the Holy One rose from his seat and entered his dwelling.

<!-- @segment mn141:7.1 -->

Then soon after the Buddha left, Venerable Sāriputta said to the mendicants,

<!-- @segment mn141:7.2 -->

“Reverends, mendicants!”

<!-- @segment mn141:7.3 -->

“Reverend,” they replied.

<!-- @segment mn141:7.4 -->

Sāriputta said this:

<!-- @segment mn141:8.1 -->

“Near Varanasi, in the deer park at Isipatana, the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha rolled forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma. And that wheel cannot be rolled back by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or divinity or by anyone in the world.

<!-- @segment mn141:8.2 -->

It is the teaching, advocating, establishing, clarifying, analyzing, and revealing of the four noble truths.

<!-- @segment mn141:8.3 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment mn141:9.1 -->

The noble truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.

<!-- @segment mn141:10.1 -->

And what is the noble truth of suffering?

<!-- @segment mn141:10.2 -->

Rebirth is suffering; old age is suffering; death is suffering; sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are suffering; not getting what you wish for is suffering. In brief, the five grasping aggregates are suffering.

<!-- @segment mn141:11.1 -->

And what is rebirth?

<!-- @segment mn141:11.2 -->

The rebirth, inception, conception, regeneration, manifestation of the aggregates, and acquisition of the sense fields of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment mn141:11.3 -->

This is called rebirth.

<!-- @segment mn141:12.1 -->

And what is old age?

<!-- @segment mn141:12.2 -->

The old age, decrepitude, broken teeth, grey hair, wrinkly skin, diminished vitality, and failing faculties of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment mn141:12.3 -->

This is called old age.

<!-- @segment mn141:13.1 -->

And what is death?

<!-- @segment mn141:13.2 -->

The passing away, passing on, disintegration, demise, mortality, death, decease, breaking up of the aggregates, laying to rest of the corpse, and cutting off of the life faculty of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment mn141:13.3 -->

This is called death.

<!-- @segment mn141:14.1 -->

And what is sorrow?

<!-- @segment mn141:14.2 -->

The sorrow, sorrowing, state of sorrow, inner sorrow, inner deep sorrow in someone who has undergone misfortune, who has experienced suffering.

<!-- @segment mn141:14.3 -->

This is called sorrow.

<!-- @segment mn141:15.1 -->

And what is lamentation?

<!-- @segment mn141:15.2 -->

The wail, lament, wailing, lamenting, state of wailing and lamentation in someone who has undergone misfortune, who has experienced suffering.

<!-- @segment mn141:15.3 -->

This is called lamentation.

<!-- @segment mn141:16.1 -->

And what is pain?

<!-- @segment mn141:16.2 -->

Physical pain, physical unpleasantness, the painful, unpleasant feeling that’s born from physical contact.

<!-- @segment mn141:16.3 -->

This is called pain.

<!-- @segment mn141:17.1 -->

And what is sadness?

<!-- @segment mn141:17.2 -->

Mental pain, mental displeasure, the painful, unpleasant feeling that’s born from mind contact.

<!-- @segment mn141:17.3 -->

This is called sadness.

<!-- @segment mn141:18.1 -->

And what is distress?

<!-- @segment mn141:18.2 -->

The stress, distress, state of stress and distress in someone who has undergone misfortune, who has experienced suffering.

<!-- @segment mn141:18.3 -->

This is called distress.

<!-- @segment mn141:19.1 -->

And what is ‘not getting what you wish for is suffering’?

<!-- @segment mn141:19.2 -->

In sentient beings who are liable to be reborn, such a wish arises:

<!-- @segment mn141:19.3 -->

‘Oh, if only we were not liable to be reborn! If only rebirth would not come to us!’

<!-- @segment mn141:19.4 -->

But you can’t get that by wishing.

<!-- @segment mn141:19.5 -->

This is: ‘not getting what you wish for is suffering.’

<!-- @segment mn141:19.6 -->

In sentient beings who are liable to grow old …

<!-- @segment mn141:19.7 -->

fall ill …

<!-- @segment mn141:19.8 -->

die …

<!-- @segment mn141:19.9 -->

experience sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress, such a wish arises:

<!-- @segment mn141:19.10 -->

‘Oh, if only we were not liable to experience sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress! If only sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress would not come to us!’

<!-- @segment mn141:19.11 -->

But you can’t get that by wishing.

<!-- @segment mn141:19.12 -->

This is: ‘not getting what you wish for is suffering.’

<!-- @segment mn141:20.1 -->

And what is ‘in brief, the five grasping aggregates are suffering’?

<!-- @segment mn141:20.2 -->

They are the grasping aggregates that consist of form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

<!-- @segment mn141:20.3 -->

This is called ‘in brief, the five grasping aggregates are suffering.’

<!-- @segment mn141:20.4 -->

This is called the noble truth of suffering.

<!-- @segment mn141:21.1 -->

And what is the noble truth of the origin of suffering?

<!-- @segment mn141:21.2 -->

It’s the craving that leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure there wherever it alights. That is,

<!-- @segment mn141:21.3 -->

craving for sensual pleasures, craving for existence, and craving for nonexistence.

<!-- @segment mn141:21.4 -->

This is called the noble truth of the origin of suffering.

<!-- @segment mn141:22.1 -->

And what is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering?

<!-- @segment mn141:22.2 -->

It’s the fading away and cessation of that very same craving no residue left behind; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not clinging to it.

<!-- @segment mn141:22.3 -->

This is called the noble truth of the cessation of suffering.

<!-- @segment mn141:23.1 -->

And what is the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering?

<!-- @segment mn141:23.2 -->

It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:

<!-- @segment mn141:23.3 -->

right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

<!-- @segment mn141:24.1 -->

And what is right view?

<!-- @segment mn141:24.2 -->

Knowing about suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.

<!-- @segment mn141:24.3 -->

This is called right view.

<!-- @segment mn141:25.1 -->

And what is right purpose?

<!-- @segment mn141:25.2 -->

Purposes of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness.

<!-- @segment mn141:25.3 -->

This is called right purpose.

<!-- @segment mn141:26.1 -->

And what is right speech?

<!-- @segment mn141:26.2 -->

Refraining from lying, backbiting, harsh speech, and talking nonsense.

<!-- @segment mn141:26.3 -->

This is called right speech.

<!-- @segment mn141:27.1 -->

And what is right action?

<!-- @segment mn141:27.2 -->

Refraining from killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct.

<!-- @segment mn141:27.3 -->

This is called right action.

<!-- @segment mn141:28.1 -->

And what is right livelihood?

<!-- @segment mn141:28.2 -->

It’s when a noble disciple gives up wrong livelihood and earns a living by right livelihood.

<!-- @segment mn141:28.3 -->

This is called right livelihood.

<!-- @segment mn141:29.1 -->

And what is right effort?

<!-- @segment mn141:29.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise.

<!-- @segment mn141:29.3 -->

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up.

<!-- @segment mn141:29.4 -->

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise.

<!-- @segment mn141:29.5 -->

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are completed by development.

<!-- @segment mn141:29.6 -->

This is called right effort.

<!-- @segment mn141:30.1 -->

And what is right mindfulness?

<!-- @segment mn141:30.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment mn141:30.3 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings …

<!-- @segment mn141:30.4 -->

mind …

<!-- @segment mn141:30.5 -->

principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment mn141:30.6 -->

This is called right mindfulness.

<!-- @segment mn141:31.1 -->

And what is right immersion?

<!-- @segment mn141:31.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment mn141:31.3 -->

As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment mn141:31.4 -->

And with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’

<!-- @segment mn141:31.5 -->

With the giving up of pleasure and pain and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

<!-- @segment mn141:31.6 -->

This is called right immersion.

<!-- @segment mn141:31.7 -->

This is called the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.

<!-- @segment mn141:32.1 -->

Near Varanasi, in the deer park at Isipatana, the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha rolled forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma. And that wheel cannot be rolled back by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or divinity or by anyone in the world.

<!-- @segment mn141:32.2 -->

It is the teaching, advocating, establishing, clarifying, analyzing, and revealing of the four noble truths.”

<!-- @segment mn141:32.3 -->

That’s what Venerable Sāriputta said.

<!-- @segment mn141:32.4 -->

Satisfied, the mendicants approved what Sāriputta said.
