---
slug: mn14
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Shorter Discourse on the Mass of Suffering
---

<!-- @segment mn14:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn14:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery.

<!-- @segment mn14:2.1 -->

Then Mahānāma the Sakyan went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn14:2.2 -->

“For a long time, sir, I have understood your teaching like this:

<!-- @segment mn14:2.3 -->

‘Greed, hate, and delusion are corruptions of the mind.’

<!-- @segment mn14:2.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn14:2.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn14:2.6 -->

Despite understanding this, sometimes my mind is occupied by thoughts of greed, hate, and delusion.

<!-- @segment mn14:2.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn14:2.8 -->

I wonder what qualities remain in me that I have such thoughts?”

<!-- @segment mn14:3.1 -->

“Mahānāma, there is a quality that remains in you that makes you have such thoughts.

<!-- @segment mn14:3.2 -->

For if you had given up that quality you would not still be living at home and enjoying sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment mn14:3.3 -->

But because you haven’t given up that quality you are still living at home and enjoying sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment mn14:4.1 -->

Sensual pleasures give little gratification and much suffering and distress, and they are all the more full of drawbacks.

<!-- @segment mn14:4.2 -->

So, Mahānāma, even though a noble disciple has clearly seen this with right wisdom, as long as they do not achieve the rapture and bliss that are apart from sensual pleasures and unskillful qualities, or something even more peaceful than that,

<!-- @segment mn14:4.3 -->

they can return to sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment mn14:4.4 -->

But when they do achieve that rapture and bliss, or something more peaceful than that,

<!-- @segment mn14:4.5 -->

they do not return to sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment mn14:5.1 -->

Before my awakening—when I was still unawakened but intent on awakening—I too clearly saw with right wisdom that:

<!-- @segment mn14:5.2 -->

‘Sensual pleasures give little gratification and much suffering and distress, and they are all the more full of drawbacks.’

<!-- @segment mn14:5.3 -->

But so long as I didn’t achieve the rapture and bliss that are apart from sensual pleasures and unskillful qualities, or something even more peaceful than that,

<!-- @segment mn14:5.4 -->

I didn’t announce that I would not return to sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment mn14:5.5 -->

But when I did achieve that rapture and bliss, or something more peaceful than that,

<!-- @segment mn14:5.6 -->

I announced that I would not return to sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment mn14:6.1 -->

And what is the gratification of sensual pleasures?

<!-- @segment mn14:6.2 -->

There are these five kinds of sensual stimulation.

<!-- @segment mn14:6.3 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment mn14:6.4 -->

Sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing.

<!-- @segment mn14:6.5 -->

Sounds known by the ear …

<!-- @segment mn14:6.6 -->

Smells known by the nose …

<!-- @segment mn14:6.7 -->

Tastes known by the tongue …

<!-- @segment mn14:6.8 -->

Touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing.

<!-- @segment mn14:6.9 -->

These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

<!-- @segment mn14:6.10 -->

The pleasure and happiness that arise from these five kinds of sensual stimulation: this is the gratification of sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment mn14:6.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn14:7.1 -->

And what is the drawback of sensual pleasures?

<!-- @segment mn14:7.2 -->

It’s when a gentleman earns a living by means such as

<!-- @segment mn14:7.3 -->

arithmetic, accounting, calculating, farming, trade, raising cattle, archery, government service, or one of the professions.

<!-- @segment mn14:7.4 -->

But they must face cold and heat, being hurt by the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles, and risking death from hunger and thirst.

<!-- @segment mn14:7.5 -->

This is a drawback of sensual pleasures apparent in the present life, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment mn14:8.1 -->

That gentleman might try hard, strive, and make an effort, but fail to earn any money.

<!-- @segment mn14:8.2 -->

If this happens, they sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion, saying: ‘Oh, my hard work is wasted. My efforts are fruitless!’

<!-- @segment mn14:8.3 -->

This too is a drawback of sensual pleasures apparent in the present life, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment mn14:9.1 -->

That gentleman might try hard, strive, and make an effort, and accrue money.

<!-- @segment mn14:9.2 -->

But they experience pain and sadness when they try to protect it, thinking:

<!-- @segment mn14:9.3 -->

‘How can I prevent my wealth from being taken by rulers or bandits, consumed by fire, swept away by flood, or taken by unloved heirs?’

<!-- @segment mn14:9.4 -->

And even though they protect it and ward it, rulers or bandits take it, or fire consumes it, or flood sweeps it away, or unloved heirs take it.

<!-- @segment mn14:9.5 -->

They sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion:

<!-- @segment mn14:9.6 -->

‘What once was mine is gone.’

<!-- @segment mn14:9.7 -->

This too is a drawback of sensual pleasures apparent in the present life, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment mn14:10.1 -->

Furthermore, for the sake of sensual pleasures kings fight with kings, aristocrats fight with aristocrats, brahmins fight with brahmins, and householders fight with householders. A mother fights with her child, child with mother, father with child, and child with father. Brother fights with brother, brother with sister, sister with brother, and friend fights with friend.

<!-- @segment mn14:10.2 -->

Once they’ve started quarreling, arguing, and disputing, they attack each other with fists, stones, rods, and swords,

<!-- @segment mn14:10.3 -->

resulting in death and deadly pain.

<!-- @segment mn14:10.4 -->

This too is a drawback of sensual pleasures apparent in the present life, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment mn14:11.1 -->

Furthermore, for the sake of sensual pleasures they don their sword and shield, fasten their bow and arrows, and plunge into a battle massed on both sides, with arrows and spears flying and swords flashing.

<!-- @segment mn14:11.2 -->

There they are struck with arrows and spears, and their heads are chopped off,

<!-- @segment mn14:11.3 -->

resulting in death and deadly pain.

<!-- @segment mn14:11.4 -->

This too is a drawback of sensual pleasures apparent in the present life, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment mn14:12.1 -->

Furthermore, for the sake of sensual pleasures they don their sword and shield, fasten their bow and arrows, and charge wetly plastered bastions, with arrows and spears flying and swords flashing.

<!-- @segment mn14:12.2 -->

There they are struck with arrows and spears, splashed with dung, crushed by a superior force, and their heads are chopped off,

<!-- @segment mn14:12.3 -->

resulting in death and deadly pain.

<!-- @segment mn14:12.4 -->

This too is a drawback of sensual pleasures apparent in the present life, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment mn14:13.1 -->

Furthermore, for the sake of sensual pleasures they break into houses, plunder wealth, steal from isolated buildings, commit highway robbery, and commit adultery.

<!-- @segment mn14:13.2 -->

The rulers would arrest them and subject them to various punishments—

<!-- @segment mn14:13.3 -->

whipping, caning, and clubbing; cutting off hands or feet, or both; cutting off ears or nose, or both; the ‘porridge pot’, the ‘shell-shave’, the ‘Rāhu’s mouth’, the ‘garland of fire’, the ‘burning hand’, the ‘bulrush twist’, the ‘bark dress’, the ‘antelope’, the ‘meat hook’, the ‘coins’, the ‘caustic pickle’, the ‘twisting bar’, the ‘straw mat’; being splashed with hot oil, being fed to the hounds, being impaled alive, and being beheaded.

<!-- @segment mn14:13.4 -->

These result in death and deadly pain.

<!-- @segment mn14:13.5 -->

This too is a drawback of sensual pleasures apparent in the present life, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment mn14:14.1 -->

Furthermore, for the sake of sensual pleasures, they conduct themselves badly by way of body, speech, and mind.

<!-- @segment mn14:14.2 -->

When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.

<!-- @segment mn14:14.3 -->

This is a drawback of sensual pleasures to do with lives to come, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment mn14:15.1 -->

Mahānāma, this one time I was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain.

<!-- @segment mn14:15.2 -->

Now at that time several Jain ascetics on the slopes of Isigili at the Black Rock were constantly standing, turning down seats. And they felt painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings due to overexertion.

<!-- @segment mn14:16.1 -->

Then in the late afternoon, I came out of retreat and went to the Black Rock to visit those Jain ascetics. I said to them,

<!-- @segment mn14:16.2 -->

‘Reverends, why are you constantly standing, turning down seats, so that you suffer painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings due to overexertion?’

<!-- @segment mn14:17.1 -->

When I said this, those Jain ascetics said to me,

<!-- @segment mn14:17.2 -->

‘Reverend, the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan claims to be all-knowing and all-seeing, to know and see everything without exception, thus:

<!-- @segment mn14:17.3 -->

“Knowledge and vision are constantly and continually present to me, while walking, standing, sleeping, and waking.”

<!-- @segment mn14:17.4 -->

He says,

<!-- @segment mn14:17.5 -->

“O Jain ascetics, you have done bad deeds in a past life. Wear them away with these severe and grueling austerities.

<!-- @segment mn14:17.6 -->

And when in the present you are restrained in body, speech, and mind, you’re not doing any bad deeds for the future.

<!-- @segment mn14:17.7 -->

So, due to eliminating past deeds by fervent mortification, and not doing any new deeds, there’s nothing to come up in the future.

<!-- @segment mn14:17.8 -->

With no future consequence, deeds end. With the ending of deeds, suffering ends. With the ending of suffering, feeling ends. And with the ending of feeling, all suffering will have been worn away.”

<!-- @segment mn14:17.9 -->

We endorse and accept this, and we are satisfied with it.’

<!-- @segment mn14:18.1 -->

When they said this, I said to them,

<!-- @segment mn14:18.2 -->

‘But reverends, do you know

<!-- @segment mn14:18.3 -->

for sure that you existed in the past, and it is not the case that you did not exist?’

<!-- @segment mn14:18.4 -->

‘No we don’t, reverend.’

<!-- @segment mn14:18.5 -->

‘But reverends, do you know

<!-- @segment mn14:18.6 -->

for sure that you did bad deeds in the past?’

<!-- @segment mn14:18.7 -->

‘No we don’t, reverend.’

<!-- @segment mn14:18.8 -->

‘But reverends, do you know

<!-- @segment mn14:18.9 -->

that you did such and such bad deeds?’

<!-- @segment mn14:18.10 -->

‘No we don’t, reverend.’

<!-- @segment mn14:18.11 -->

‘But reverends, do you know

<!-- @segment mn14:18.12 -->

that so much suffering has already been worn away? Or that so much suffering still remains to be worn away? Or that when so much suffering is worn away all suffering will have been worn away?’

<!-- @segment mn14:18.13 -->

‘No we don’t, reverend.’

<!-- @segment mn14:18.14 -->

‘But reverends, do you know

<!-- @segment mn14:18.15 -->

about giving up unskillful qualities in this very life and embracing skillful qualities?’

<!-- @segment mn14:18.16 -->

‘No we don’t, reverend.’

<!-- @segment mn14:19.1 -->

‘So it seems that you don’t know any of these things.

<!-- @segment mn14:19.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn14:19.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn14:19.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn14:19.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn14:19.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn14:19.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn14:19.8 -->

That being so, when those in the world who are violent and bloody-handed and of cruel livelihood are reborn among humans they go forth as Jain ascetics.’

<!-- @segment mn14:20.1 -->

‘Reverend Gotama, pleasure is not gained through pleasure; pleasure is gained through pain.

<!-- @segment mn14:20.2 -->

For if pleasure were to be gained through pleasure, King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha would gain pleasure, since he lives in greater pleasure than Venerable Gotama.’

<!-- @segment mn14:20.3 -->

‘Clearly the venerables have spoken rashly, without reflection.

<!-- @segment mn14:20.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn14:20.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn14:20.6 -->

Rather, I’m the one who should be asked about

<!-- @segment mn14:20.7 -->

who lives in greater pleasure, King Bimbisāra or Venerable Gotama?’

<!-- @segment mn14:20.8 -->

‘Clearly we spoke rashly and without reflection.

<!-- @segment mn14:20.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn14:20.10 -->

But let that be. Now we ask Venerable Gotama:

<!-- @segment mn14:20.11 -->

“Who lives in greater pleasure, King Bimbisāra or Venerable Gotama?”’

<!-- @segment mn14:21.1 -->

‘Well then, reverends, I’ll ask you about this in return, and you can answer as you like.

<!-- @segment mn14:21.2 -->

What do you think, reverends?

<!-- @segment mn14:21.3 -->

Is King Bimbisāra capable of experiencing perfect happiness for seven days and nights without moving his body or speaking?’

<!-- @segment mn14:21.4 -->

‘No he is not, reverend.’

<!-- @segment mn14:21.5 -->

‘What do you think, reverends?

<!-- @segment mn14:21.6 -->

Is King Bimbisāra capable of experiencing perfect happiness for six days …

<!-- @segment mn14:21.7 -->

five days …

<!-- @segment mn14:21.8 -->

four days …

<!-- @segment mn14:21.9 -->

three days …

<!-- @segment mn14:21.10 -->

two days …

<!-- @segment mn14:21.11 -->

one day?’

<!-- @segment mn14:21.12 -->

‘No he is not, reverend.’

<!-- @segment mn14:21.13 -->

‘But I am capable of experiencing perfect happiness for one day and night without moving my body or speaking.

<!-- @segment mn14:21.14 -->

I am capable of experiencing perfect happiness for two days …

<!-- @segment mn14:21.15 -->

three days …

<!-- @segment mn14:21.16 -->

four days …

<!-- @segment mn14:21.17 -->

five days …

<!-- @segment mn14:21.18 -->

six days …

<!-- @segment mn14:21.19 -->

seven days.

<!-- @segment mn14:21.20 -->

What do you think, reverends? This being so, who lives in greater pleasure, King Bimbisāra or I?’

<!-- @segment mn14:21.21 -->

‘This being so, Venerable Gotama lives in greater pleasure than King Bimbisāra.’”

<!-- @segment mn14:21.22 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn14:21.23 -->

Satisfied, Mahānāma the Sakyan approved what the Buddha said.
