---
slug: mn16
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Hard-heartedness
---

<!-- @segment mn16:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn16:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment mn16:1.3 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,

<!-- @segment mn16:1.4 -->

“Mendicants!”

<!-- @segment mn16:1.5 -->

“Venerable sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment mn16:1.6 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment mn16:2.1 -->

“Mendicants, when a mendicant has not given up five kinds of hard-heartedness and severed five shackles of the heart, it’s not possible for them to achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training.

<!-- @segment mn16:3.1 -->

What are the five kinds of hard-heartedness they haven’t given up?

<!-- @segment mn16:3.2 -->

Firstly, a mendicant has doubts about the Teacher. They’re uncertain, undecided, and lacking confidence.

<!-- @segment mn16:3.3 -->

This being so, their mind doesn’t incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving.

<!-- @segment mn16:3.4 -->

This is the first kind of hard-heartedness they haven’t given up.

<!-- @segment mn16:4.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant has doubts about the teaching …

<!-- @segment mn16:4.2 -->

This is the second kind of hard-heartedness.

<!-- @segment mn16:5.1 -->

They have doubts about the Saṅgha …

<!-- @segment mn16:5.2 -->

This is the third kind of hard-heartedness.

<!-- @segment mn16:6.1 -->

They have doubts about the training …

<!-- @segment mn16:6.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn16:6.3 -->

This is the fourth kind of hard-heartedness.

<!-- @segment mn16:7.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant is angry and upset with their spiritual companions, resentful and closed off.

<!-- @segment mn16:7.2 -->

This being so, their mind doesn’t incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving.

<!-- @segment mn16:7.3 -->

This is the fifth kind of hard-heartedness they haven’t given up.

<!-- @segment mn16:7.4 -->

These are the five kinds of hard-heartedness they haven’t given up.

<!-- @segment mn16:8.1 -->

What are the five shackles of the heart they haven’t severed?

<!-- @segment mn16:8.2 -->

Firstly, a mendicant isn’t free of greed, desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and craving for sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment mn16:8.3 -->

This being so, their mind doesn’t incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving.

<!-- @segment mn16:8.4 -->

This is the first shackle of the heart they haven’t severed.

<!-- @segment mn16:9.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant isn’t free of greed for the body …

<!-- @segment mn16:9.2 -->

This is the second shackle of the heart.

<!-- @segment mn16:10.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant isn’t free of greed for form …

<!-- @segment mn16:10.2 -->

This is the third shackle of the heart.

<!-- @segment mn16:11.1 -->

They eat as much as they like until their belly is full, then indulge in the pleasures of sleeping, lying down, and drowsing …

<!-- @segment mn16:11.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn16:11.3 -->

This is the fourth heart shackle.

<!-- @segment mn16:12.1 -->

They lead the spiritual life hoping to be reborn in one of the orders of gods, thinking: ‘By this precept or observance or fervent austerity or spiritual practice, may I become one of the gods!’

<!-- @segment mn16:12.2 -->

This being so, their mind doesn’t incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving.

<!-- @segment mn16:12.3 -->

This is the fifth shackle of the heart they haven’t severed.

<!-- @segment mn16:12.4 -->

These are the five shackles of the heart they haven’t severed.

<!-- @segment mn16:13.1 -->

When a mendicant has not given up these five kinds of hard-heartedness and severed these five shackles of the heart, it’s not possible for them to achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training.

<!-- @segment mn16:14.1 -->

When a mendicant has given up these five kinds of hard-heartedness and severed these five shackles of the heart, it is possible for them to achieve growth, improvement, and maturity in this teaching and training.

<!-- @segment mn16:15.1 -->

What are the five kinds of hard-heartedness they’ve given up?

<!-- @segment mn16:15.2 -->

Firstly, a mendicant has no doubts about the Teacher. They’re not uncertain, undecided, or lacking confidence.

<!-- @segment mn16:15.3 -->

This being so, their mind inclines toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving.

<!-- @segment mn16:15.4 -->

This is the first kind of hard-heartedness they’ve given up.

<!-- @segment mn16:16.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant has no doubts about the teaching …

<!-- @segment mn16:16.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn16:17.1 -->

They have no doubts about the Saṅgha …

<!-- @segment mn16:17.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn16:18.1 -->

They have no doubts about the training …

<!-- @segment mn16:18.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn16:19.1 -->

They’re not angry and upset with their spiritual companions, not resentful or closed off.

<!-- @segment mn16:19.2 -->

This being so, their mind inclines toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving.

<!-- @segment mn16:19.3 -->

This is the fifth kind of hard-heartedness they’ve given up.

<!-- @segment mn16:19.4 -->

These are the five kinds of hard-heartedness they’ve given up.

<!-- @segment mn16:20.1 -->

What are the five shackles of the heart they’ve severed?

<!-- @segment mn16:20.2 -->

Firstly, a mendicant is rid of greed, desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and craving for sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment mn16:20.3 -->

This being so, their mind inclines toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving.

<!-- @segment mn16:20.4 -->

This is the first shackle of the heart they’ve severed.

<!-- @segment mn16:21.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant is rid of greed for the body …

<!-- @segment mn16:22.1 -->

They’re rid of greed for form …

<!-- @segment mn16:23.1 -->

They don’t eat as much as they like until their belly is full, then indulge in the pleasures of sleeping, lying down, and drowsing …

<!-- @segment mn16:23.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn16:23.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn16:24.1 -->

They don’t lead the spiritual life hoping to be reborn in one of the orders of gods, thinking: ‘By this precept or observance or fervent austerity or spiritual practice, may I become one of the gods!’

<!-- @segment mn16:24.2 -->

This being so, their mind inclines toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving.

<!-- @segment mn16:24.3 -->

This is the fifth shackle of the heart they’ve severed.

<!-- @segment mn16:24.4 -->

These are the five shackles of the heart they’ve severed.

<!-- @segment mn16:25.1 -->

When a mendicant has given up these five kinds of hard-heartedness and severed these five shackles of the heart, it is possible for them to achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training.

<!-- @segment mn16:26.1 -->

They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort …

<!-- @segment mn16:26.2 -->

the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy, and active effort …

<!-- @segment mn16:26.3 -->

the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and active effort …

<!-- @segment mn16:26.4 -->

the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry, and active effort. And the fifth is sheer vigor.

<!-- @segment mn16:27.1 -->

A mendicant who possesses these fifteen factors, including vigor, is capable of breaking out, becoming awakened, and reaching the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.

<!-- @segment mn16:27.2 -->

Suppose there was a chicken with eight or ten or twelve eggs.

<!-- @segment mn16:27.3 -->

And she properly sat on them to keep them warm and incubated.

<!-- @segment mn16:27.4 -->

Even if that chicken doesn’t wish:

<!-- @segment mn16:27.5 -->

‘If only my chicks could break out of the eggshell with their claws and beak and hatch safely!’

<!-- @segment mn16:27.6 -->

Still they can break out and hatch safely.

<!-- @segment mn16:27.7 -->

In the same way, a mendicant who possesses these fifteen factors, including vigor, is capable of breaking out, becoming awakened, and reaching the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.”

<!-- @segment mn16:27.8 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn16:27.9 -->

Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said.
