---
slug: mn24
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Chariots at the Ready
---

<!-- @segment mn24:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn24:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground.

<!-- @segment mn24:2.1 -->

Then several mendicants who had completed the rainy season residence in their native land went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to them:

<!-- @segment mn24:2.2 -->

“In your native land, mendicants, which of the native mendicants is esteemed in this way:

<!-- @segment mn24:2.3 -->

‘Personally having few wishes, they speak to the mendicants on having few wishes. Personally having contentment, seclusion, aloofness, energy, ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom, they speak to the mendicants on all these things. They’re an adviser and counselor, one who educates, encourages, fires up, and inspires their spiritual companions.’”

<!-- @segment mn24:2.4 -->

“Puṇṇa son of Mantāṇī, sir, is esteemed in this way in our native land.”

<!-- @segment mn24:2.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn24:3.1 -->

Now at that time Venerable Sāriputta was sitting not far from the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn24:3.2 -->

Then he thought:

<!-- @segment mn24:3.3 -->

“Puṇṇa son of Mantāṇī is fortunate, so very fortunate,

<!-- @segment mn24:3.4 -->

in that his sensible spiritual companions praise him point by point in the presence of the Teacher, and that the Teacher seconds that appreciation.

<!-- @segment mn24:3.5 -->

Hopefully, some time or other I’ll get to meet Venerable Puṇṇa, and we can have a discussion.”

<!-- @segment mn24:4.1 -->

When the Buddha had stayed in Rājagaha as long as he pleased, he set out for Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment mn24:4.2 -->

Traveling stage by stage, he arrived at Sāvatthī,

<!-- @segment mn24:4.3 -->

where he stayed in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment mn24:4.4 -->

Puṇṇa heard that the Buddha had arrived at Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment mn24:5.1 -->

Then he set his lodgings in order and, taking his bowl and robe, set out for Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment mn24:5.2 -->

Eventually he came to Sāvatthī and Jeta’s Grove. He went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side.

<!-- @segment mn24:5.3 -->

The Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired him with a Dhamma talk.

<!-- @segment mn24:5.4 -->

Then, having approved and agreed with what the Buddha said, Puṇṇa rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right. Then he went to the Dark Forest for the day’s meditation.

<!-- @segment mn24:6.1 -->

Then a certain mendicant went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn24:6.2 -->

“Reverend Sāriputta, the mendicant named Puṇṇa, of whom you have often spoken so highly, after being inspired by a talk of the Buddha’s, left for the Dark Forest for the day’s meditation.”

<!-- @segment mn24:7.1 -->

Sāriputta quickly grabbed his sitting cloth and followed behind Puṇṇa, keeping sight of his head.

<!-- @segment mn24:7.2 -->

Puṇṇa plunged deep into the Dark Forest and sat at the root of a tree for the day’s meditation.

<!-- @segment mn24:7.3 -->

And Sāriputta did likewise.

<!-- @segment mn24:8.1 -->

Then in the late afternoon, Sāriputta came out of retreat, went to Puṇṇa, and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment mn24:8.2 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to Puṇṇa:

<!-- @segment mn24:9.1 -->

“Reverend, is our spiritual life lived under the Buddha?”

<!-- @segment mn24:9.2 -->

“Yes, reverend.”

<!-- @segment mn24:9.3 -->

“Is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for the sake of purification of ethics?”

<!-- @segment mn24:9.4 -->

“Certainly not.”

<!-- @segment mn24:9.5 -->

“Well, is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for the sake of purification of mind?”

<!-- @segment mn24:9.6 -->

“Certainly not.”

<!-- @segment mn24:9.7 -->

“Is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for the sake of purification of view?”

<!-- @segment mn24:9.8 -->

“Certainly not.”

<!-- @segment mn24:9.9 -->

“Well, is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for the sake of purification by traversing doubt?”

<!-- @segment mn24:9.10 -->

“Certainly not.”

<!-- @segment mn24:9.11 -->

“Is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for the sake of purification of knowledge and vision of what is the path and what is not the path?”

<!-- @segment mn24:9.12 -->

“Certainly not.”

<!-- @segment mn24:9.13 -->

“Well, is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for the sake of purification of knowledge and vision of the practice?”

<!-- @segment mn24:9.14 -->

“Certainly not.”

<!-- @segment mn24:9.15 -->

“Is the spiritual life lived under the Buddha for the sake of purification of knowledge and vision?”

<!-- @segment mn24:9.16 -->

“Certainly not.”

<!-- @segment mn24:10.1 -->

“When asked each of these questions, you answered, ‘Certainly not.’

<!-- @segment mn24:10.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn24:10.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn24:10.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn24:10.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn24:10.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn24:10.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn24:10.8 -->

Then what exactly is the goal of leading the spiritual life under the Buddha?”

<!-- @segment mn24:10.9 -->

“The goal of leading the spiritual life under the Buddha is complete extinguishment with no fuel for grasping.”

<!-- @segment mn24:11.1 -->

“Reverend, is purification of ethics complete extinguishment with no fuel for grasping?”

<!-- @segment mn24:11.2 -->

“Certainly not, reverend.”

<!-- @segment mn24:11.3 -->

“Is purification of mind …

<!-- @segment mn24:11.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn24:11.5 -->

purification of view …

<!-- @segment mn24:11.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn24:11.7 -->

purification by traversing doubt …

<!-- @segment mn24:11.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn24:11.9 -->

purification of knowledge and vision of what is the path and what is not the path …

<!-- @segment mn24:11.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn24:11.11 -->

purification of knowledge and vision of the practice …

<!-- @segment mn24:11.12 -->



<!-- @segment mn24:11.13 -->

Is purification of knowledge and vision complete extinguishment with no fuel for grasping?”

<!-- @segment mn24:11.14 -->

“Certainly not.”

<!-- @segment mn24:11.15 -->

“Then is complete extinguishment with no fuel for grasping something apart from these things?”

<!-- @segment mn24:11.16 -->

“Certainly not.”

<!-- @segment mn24:12.1 -->

“When asked each of these questions, you answered, ‘Certainly not.’

<!-- @segment mn24:12.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn24:12.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn24:12.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn24:12.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn24:12.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn24:12.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn24:12.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn24:12.9 -->

How then should we see the meaning of this statement?”

<!-- @segment mn24:13.1 -->

“If the Buddha had declared purification of ethics to be complete extinguishment with no fuel for grasping, he would have declared that which grasps fuel to be complete extinguishment without grasping fuel.

<!-- @segment mn24:13.2 -->

If the Buddha had declared purification of mind …

<!-- @segment mn24:13.3 -->

purification of view …

<!-- @segment mn24:13.4 -->

purification by traversing doubt …

<!-- @segment mn24:13.5 -->

purification of knowledge and vision of what is the path and what is not the path …

<!-- @segment mn24:13.6 -->

purification of knowledge and vision of the practice …

<!-- @segment mn24:13.7 -->

If the Buddha had declared purification of knowledge and vision to be complete extinguishment with no fuel for grasping, he would have declared that which grasps fuel to be complete extinguishment without grasping fuel.

<!-- @segment mn24:13.8 -->

But if complete extinguishment with no fuel for grasping was something apart from these things, an ordinary person would become extinguished.

<!-- @segment mn24:13.9 -->

For an ordinary person lacks these things.

<!-- @segment mn24:14.1 -->

Well then, reverend, I shall give you a simile.

<!-- @segment mn24:14.2 -->

For by means of a simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

<!-- @segment mn24:14.3 -->

Suppose that, while staying in Sāvatthī, King Pasenadi of Kosala had some urgent business come up in Sāketa.

<!-- @segment mn24:14.4 -->

Now, between Sāvatthī and Sāketa seven chariots were stationed at the ready for him.

<!-- @segment mn24:14.5 -->

Then Pasenadi, exiting Sāvatthī, mounted the first chariot at the ready by the gate of the royal compound. The first chariot at the ready would bring him to the second, where he’d dismount and mount the second chariot.

<!-- @segment mn24:14.6 -->

The second chariot at the ready would bring him to the third …

<!-- @segment mn24:14.7 -->

The third chariot at the ready would bring him to the fourth …

<!-- @segment mn24:14.8 -->

The fourth chariot at the ready would bring him to the fifth …

<!-- @segment mn24:14.9 -->

The fifth chariot at the ready would bring him to the sixth …

<!-- @segment mn24:14.10 -->

The sixth chariot at the ready would bring him to the seventh, where he’d dismount and mount the seventh chariot.

<!-- @segment mn24:14.11 -->

The seventh chariot at the ready would bring him to the gate of the royal compound of Sāketa.

<!-- @segment mn24:14.12 -->

And when he was at the gate, friends and colleagues, relatives and kin would ask him:

<!-- @segment mn24:14.13 -->

‘Great king, did you come to Sāketa from Sāvatthī by this chariot at the ready?’

<!-- @segment mn24:14.14 -->

If asked this, how should King Pasenadi rightly reply?”

<!-- @segment mn24:14.15 -->

“The king should reply:

<!-- @segment mn24:14.16 -->

‘Well, while staying in Sāvatthī, I had some urgent business come up in Sāketa.

<!-- @segment mn24:14.17 -->

Now, between Sāvatthī and Sāketa seven chariots were stationed at the ready for me.

<!-- @segment mn24:14.18 -->

Then, exiting Sāvatthī, I mounted the first chariot at the ready by the gate of the royal compound.

<!-- @segment mn24:14.19 -->

The first chariot at the ready brought me to the second, where I dismounted and mounted the second chariot. …

<!-- @segment mn24:14.20 -->

The second chariot brought me to the third …

<!-- @segment mn24:14.21 -->

the fourth …

<!-- @segment mn24:14.22 -->

the fifth …

<!-- @segment mn24:14.23 -->

the sixth …

<!-- @segment mn24:14.24 -->

The sixth chariot at the ready brought me to the seventh, where I dismounted and mounted the seventh chariot.

<!-- @segment mn24:14.25 -->

The seventh chariot at the ready brought me to the gate of the royal compound of Sāketa.’

<!-- @segment mn24:14.26 -->

That’s how King Pasenadi should rightly reply.”

<!-- @segment mn24:15.1 -->

“In the same way, reverend, purification of ethics is only for the sake of purification of mind. Purification of mind is only for the sake of purification of view. Purification of view is only for the sake of purification by traversing doubt. Purification by traversing doubt is only for the sake of purification of knowledge and vision of what is the path and what is not the path. Purification of knowledge and vision of what is the path and what is not the path is only for the sake of purification of knowledge and vision of the practice. Purification of knowledge and vision of the practice is only for the sake of purification of knowledge and vision. Purification of knowledge and vision is only for the sake of extinguishment with no fuel for grasping.

<!-- @segment mn24:15.2 -->

The spiritual life is lived under the Buddha for the sake of complete extinguishment with no fuel for grasping.”

<!-- @segment mn24:16.1 -->

When he said this, Sāriputta said to Puṇṇa,

<!-- @segment mn24:16.2 -->

“What is the venerable’s name? And how are you known among your spiritual companions?”

<!-- @segment mn24:16.3 -->

“Reverend, my name is Puṇṇa.

<!-- @segment mn24:16.4 -->

And I am known as ‘son of Mantāṇī’ among my spiritual companions.”

<!-- @segment mn24:16.5 -->

“It’s incredible, reverend, it’s amazing!

<!-- @segment mn24:16.6 -->

Venerable Puṇṇa son of Mantāṇī has answered each deep question point by point, as a learned disciple who rightly understands the teacher’s instructions.

<!-- @segment mn24:16.7 -->

It is fortunate for his spiritual companions, so very fortunate,

<!-- @segment mn24:16.8 -->

that they get to see Venerable Puṇṇa son of Mantāṇī and pay homage to him.

<!-- @segment mn24:16.9 -->

Even if they only got to see him and pay respects to him by carrying him around on their heads on a roll of cloth, it would still be very fortunate for them! And it’s fortunate for me, so very fortunate, that I get to see the venerable and pay homage to him.”

<!-- @segment mn24:17.1 -->

When he said this, Puṇṇa said to Sāriputta,

<!-- @segment mn24:17.2 -->

“What is the venerable’s name? And how are you known among your spiritual companions?”

<!-- @segment mn24:17.3 -->

“Reverend, my name is Upatissa.

<!-- @segment mn24:17.4 -->

And I am known as Sāriputta among my spiritual companions.”

<!-- @segment mn24:17.5 -->

“Goodness! I had no idea I was consulting with <em>the</em> Venerable Sāriputta, the disciple who is fit to be compared with the Teacher himself!

<!-- @segment mn24:17.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn24:17.7 -->

If I’d known, I would not have said so much.

<!-- @segment mn24:17.8 -->

It’s incredible, reverend, it’s amazing!

<!-- @segment mn24:17.9 -->

Venerable Sāriputta has asked each deep question point by point, as a learned disciple who rightly understands the teacher’s instructions.

<!-- @segment mn24:17.10 -->

It is fortunate for his spiritual companions, so very fortunate,

<!-- @segment mn24:17.11 -->

that they get to see Venerable Sāriputta and pay homage to him.

<!-- @segment mn24:17.12 -->

Even if they only got to see him and pay respects to him by carrying him around on their heads on a roll of cloth, it would still be very fortunate for them! And it’s fortunate for me, so very fortunate, that I get to see the venerable and pay homage to him.”

<!-- @segment mn24:17.13 -->

And so these two spiritual giants agreed with each other’s fine words.
