---
slug: mn26
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Noble Quest
---

<!-- @segment mn26:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn26:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment mn26:2.1 -->

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms.

<!-- @segment mn26:2.2 -->

Then several mendicants went up to Venerable Ānanda and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn26:2.3 -->

“Reverend, it’s been a long time since we’ve heard a Dhamma talk from the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn26:2.4 -->

It would be good if we got to hear a Dhamma talk from the Buddha.”

<!-- @segment mn26:2.5 -->

“Well then, reverends, go to the brahmin Rammaka’s hermitage.

<!-- @segment mn26:2.6 -->

Hopefully you’ll get to hear a Dhamma talk from the Buddha.”

<!-- @segment mn26:2.7 -->

“Yes, reverend,” they replied.

<!-- @segment mn26:3.1 -->

Then, after the meal, on his return from almsround, the Buddha addressed Ānanda,

<!-- @segment mn26:3.2 -->

“Come, Ānanda, let’s go to the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother in the Eastern Monastery for the day’s meditation.”

<!-- @segment mn26:3.3 -->

“Yes, sir,” Ānanda replied.

<!-- @segment mn26:3.4 -->

So the Buddha went with Ānanda to the Eastern Monastery for the day’s meditation.

<!-- @segment mn26:3.5 -->

In the late afternoon the Buddha came out of retreat and addressed Ānanda,

<!-- @segment mn26:3.6 -->

“Come, Ānanda, let’s go to the eastern gate to bathe.”

<!-- @segment mn26:3.7 -->

“Yes, sir,” Ānanda replied.

<!-- @segment mn26:3.8 -->

So the Buddha went with Ānanda to the eastern gate to bathe.

<!-- @segment mn26:3.9 -->

When he had bathed and emerged from the water he stood in one robe drying his limbs.

<!-- @segment mn26:3.10 -->

Then Ānanda said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn26:3.11 -->

“Sir, the hermitage of the brahmin Rammaka is nearby.

<!-- @segment mn26:3.12 -->

It’s so delightful,

<!-- @segment mn26:3.13 -->

so lovely.

<!-- @segment mn26:3.14 -->

Please visit it out of sympathy.”

<!-- @segment mn26:3.15 -->

The Buddha consented with silence.

<!-- @segment mn26:4.1 -->

He went to the brahmin Rammaka’s hermitage.

<!-- @segment mn26:4.2 -->

Now at that time several mendicants were sitting together in the hermitage talking about the teaching.

<!-- @segment mn26:4.3 -->

The Buddha stood outside the door waiting for the talk to end.

<!-- @segment mn26:4.4 -->

When he knew the talk had ended he cleared his throat and knocked on the door-panel.

<!-- @segment mn26:4.5 -->

The mendicants opened the door for the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn26:4.6 -->

and he entered the hermitage, where he sat on the seat spread out

<!-- @segment mn26:4.7 -->

and addressed the mendicants,

<!-- @segment mn26:4.8 -->

“Mendicants, what were you sitting talking about just now? What conversation was left unfinished?”

<!-- @segment mn26:4.9 -->

“Sir, our unfinished discussion on the teaching was about the Buddha himself when the Buddha arrived.”

<!-- @segment mn26:4.10 -->

“Good, mendicants!

<!-- @segment mn26:4.11 -->

It’s appropriate for gentlemen like you, who have gone forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness, to sit together and talk about the teaching.

<!-- @segment mn26:4.12 -->

When you’re sitting together you should do one of two things:

<!-- @segment mn26:4.13 -->

discuss the teachings or keep noble silence.

<!-- @segment mn26:5.1 -->

Mendicants, there are these two quests:

<!-- @segment mn26:5.2 -->

the noble quest and the ignoble quest.

<!-- @segment mn26:5.3 -->

And what is the ignoble quest?

<!-- @segment mn26:5.4 -->

It’s when someone who is themselves liable to be reborn seeks what is also liable to be reborn. Themselves liable to grow old, fall sick, die, sorrow, and become corrupted, they seek what is also liable to these things.

<!-- @segment mn26:6.1 -->

And what should be described as liable to be reborn?

<!-- @segment mn26:6.2 -->

Partners and children, male and female bondservants, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, elephants and cattle, and gold and currency are liable to be reborn.

<!-- @segment mn26:6.3 -->

These attachments are liable to be reborn.

<!-- @segment mn26:6.4 -->

Someone who is tied, infatuated, and attached to such things, themselves liable to being reborn, seeks what is also liable to be reborn.

<!-- @segment mn26:7.1 -->

And what should be described as liable to grow old?

<!-- @segment mn26:7.2 -->

Partners and children, male and female bondservants, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, elephants and cattle, and gold and currency are liable to grow old.

<!-- @segment mn26:7.3 -->

These attachments are liable to grow old.

<!-- @segment mn26:7.4 -->

Someone who is tied, infatuated, and attached to such things, themselves liable to grow old, seeks what is also liable to grow old.

<!-- @segment mn26:8.1 -->

And what should be described as liable to fall sick?

<!-- @segment mn26:8.2 -->

Partners and children, male and female bondservants, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and elephants and cattle are liable to fall sick.

<!-- @segment mn26:8.3 -->

These attachments are liable to fall sick.

<!-- @segment mn26:8.4 -->

Someone who is tied, infatuated, and attached to such things, themselves liable to falling sick, seeks what is also liable to fall sick.

<!-- @segment mn26:9.1 -->

And what should be described as liable to die?

<!-- @segment mn26:9.2 -->

Partners and children, male and female bondservants, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and elephants and cattle are liable to die.

<!-- @segment mn26:9.3 -->

These attachments are liable to die.

<!-- @segment mn26:9.4 -->

Someone who is tied, infatuated, and attached to such things, themselves liable to die, seeks what is also liable to die.

<!-- @segment mn26:10.1 -->

And what should be described as liable to sorrow?

<!-- @segment mn26:10.2 -->

Partners and children, male and female bondservants, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and elephants and cattle are liable to sorrow.

<!-- @segment mn26:10.3 -->

These attachments are liable to sorrow.

<!-- @segment mn26:10.4 -->

Someone who is tied, infatuated, and attached to such things, themselves liable to sorrow, seeks what is also liable to sorrow.

<!-- @segment mn26:11.1 -->

And what should be described as liable to corruption?

<!-- @segment mn26:11.2 -->

Partners and children, male and female bondservants, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, elephants and cattle, and gold and currency are liable to corruption.

<!-- @segment mn26:11.3 -->

These attachments are liable to corruption.

<!-- @segment mn26:11.4 -->

Someone who is tied, infatuated, and attached to such things, themselves liable to corruption, seeks what is also liable to corruption.

<!-- @segment mn26:11.5 -->

This is the ignoble quest.

<!-- @segment mn26:12.1 -->

And what is the noble quest?

<!-- @segment mn26:12.2 -->

It’s when someone who is themselves liable to be reborn, understanding the drawbacks in being liable to be reborn, seeks that which is free of rebirth, the supreme sanctuary from the yoke, extinguishment. Themselves liable to grow old, fall sick, die, sorrow, and become corrupted, understanding the drawbacks in these things, they seek that which is free of old age, sickness, death, sorrow, and corruption, the supreme sanctuary from the yoke, extinguishment.

<!-- @segment mn26:12.3 -->

This is the noble quest.

<!-- @segment mn26:13.1 -->

Mendicants, before my awakening—when I was still unawakened but intent on awakening—I too, being liable to be reborn, sought what is also liable to be reborn. Myself liable to grow old, fall sick, die, sorrow, and become corrupted, I sought what is also liable to these things.

<!-- @segment mn26:13.2 -->

Then it occurred to me:

<!-- @segment mn26:13.3 -->

‘Why do I, being liable to be reborn, grow old, fall sick, sorrow, die, and become corrupted, seek things that have the same nature?

<!-- @segment mn26:13.4 -->

Why don’t I seek that which is free of rebirth, old age, sickness, death, sorrow, and corruption, the supreme sanctuary from the yoke, extinguishment?’

<!-- @segment mn26:14.1 -->

Some time later, while still with pristine black hair, blessed with youth, in the prime of life—though my mother and father wished otherwise, weeping with tearful faces—I shaved off my hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and went forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment mn26:15.1 -->

Once I had gone forth I set out to discover what is skillful, seeking the supreme state of sublime peace. I approached Āḷāra Kālāma and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn26:15.2 -->

‘Reverend Kālāma, I wish to lead the spiritual life in this teaching and training.’

<!-- @segment mn26:15.3 -->

Āḷāra Kālāma replied,

<!-- @segment mn26:15.4 -->

‘Stay, venerable.

<!-- @segment mn26:15.5 -->

This teaching is such that a sensible person can soon realize their own tradition with their own insight and live having achieved it.’

<!-- @segment mn26:15.6 -->

I quickly memorized that teaching.

<!-- @segment mn26:15.7 -->

As far as lip-recital and verbal repetition went, I spoke the doctrine of knowledge, the elder doctrine. I claimed to know and see, and so did others.

<!-- @segment mn26:15.8 -->

Then it occurred to me,

<!-- @segment mn26:15.9 -->

‘It is not solely by mere faith that Āḷāra Kālāma declares: “I realize this teaching with my own insight, and live having achieved it.”

<!-- @segment mn26:15.10 -->

Surely he meditates knowing and seeing this teaching.’

<!-- @segment mn26:15.11 -->

So I approached Āḷāra Kālāma and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn26:15.12 -->

‘Reverend Kālāma, to what extent do you say you’ve realized this teaching with your own insight?’

<!-- @segment mn26:15.13 -->

When I said this, he declared the dimension of nothingness.

<!-- @segment mn26:15.14 -->

Then it occurred to me,

<!-- @segment mn26:15.15 -->

‘It’s not just Āḷāra Kālāma who has faith,

<!-- @segment mn26:15.16 -->

energy,

<!-- @segment mn26:15.17 -->

mindfulness,

<!-- @segment mn26:15.18 -->

immersion,

<!-- @segment mn26:15.19 -->

and wisdom; I too have these things.

<!-- @segment mn26:15.20 -->

Why don’t I make an effort to realize the same teaching that Āḷāra Kālāma says he has realized with his own insight?’

<!-- @segment mn26:15.21 -->

I quickly realized that teaching with my own insight, and lived having achieved it.

<!-- @segment mn26:15.22 -->

So I approached Āḷāra Kālāma and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn26:15.23 -->

‘Reverend Kālāma, is it up to this point that you realized this teaching with your own insight, and declare having achieved it?’

<!-- @segment mn26:15.24 -->

‘I have, reverend.’

<!-- @segment mn26:15.25 -->

‘I too, reverend, have realized this teaching with my own insight up to this point, and live having achieved it.’

<!-- @segment mn26:15.26 -->

‘We are fortunate, reverend, so very fortunate

<!-- @segment mn26:15.27 -->

to see a venerable such as yourself as one of our spiritual companions!

<!-- @segment mn26:15.28 -->

So the teaching that I’ve realized with my own insight, and declare having achieved it, you’ve realized with your own insight, and dwell having achieved it.

<!-- @segment mn26:15.29 -->

The teaching that you’ve realized with your own insight, and dwell having achieved it, I’ve realized with my own insight, and declare having achieved it.

<!-- @segment mn26:15.30 -->

So the teaching that I know, you know, and the teaching that you know, I know.

<!-- @segment mn26:15.31 -->

I am like you and you are like me.

<!-- @segment mn26:15.32 -->

Come now, reverend! We should both lead this community together.’

<!-- @segment mn26:15.33 -->

And that is how my tutor Āḷāra Kālāma placed me, his pupil, on the same position as him, and honored me with high praise.

<!-- @segment mn26:15.34 -->

Then it occurred to me,

<!-- @segment mn26:15.35 -->

‘This teaching doesn’t lead to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. It only leads as far as rebirth in the dimension of nothingness.’

<!-- @segment mn26:15.36 -->

Realizing that this teaching was inadequate, I left disappointed.

<!-- @segment mn26:16.1 -->

I set out to discover what is skillful, seeking the supreme state of sublime peace. I approached Uddaka son of Rāma and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn26:16.2 -->

‘Reverend, I wish to lead the spiritual life in this teaching and training.’

<!-- @segment mn26:16.3 -->

Uddaka replied,

<!-- @segment mn26:16.4 -->

‘Stay, venerable.

<!-- @segment mn26:16.5 -->

This teaching is such that a sensible person can soon realize their own tradition with their own insight and live having achieved it.’

<!-- @segment mn26:16.6 -->

I quickly memorized that teaching.

<!-- @segment mn26:16.7 -->

As far as lip-recital and verbal repetition went, I spoke the doctrine of knowledge, the elder doctrine. I claimed to know and see, and so did others.

<!-- @segment mn26:16.8 -->

Then it occurred to me,

<!-- @segment mn26:16.9 -->

‘It is not solely by mere faith that Rāma declared: “I realize this teaching with my own insight, and live having achieved it.”

<!-- @segment mn26:16.10 -->

Surely he meditated knowing and seeing this teaching.’

<!-- @segment mn26:16.11 -->

So I approached Uddaka son of Rāma and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn26:16.12 -->

‘Reverend, to what extent did Rāma say he’d realized this teaching with his own insight?’

<!-- @segment mn26:16.13 -->

When I said this, Uddaka son of Rāma declared the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception.

<!-- @segment mn26:16.14 -->

Then it occurred to me,

<!-- @segment mn26:16.15 -->

‘It’s not just Rāma who had faith,

<!-- @segment mn26:16.16 -->

energy,

<!-- @segment mn26:16.17 -->

mindfulness,

<!-- @segment mn26:16.18 -->

immersion,

<!-- @segment mn26:16.19 -->

and wisdom; I too have these things.

<!-- @segment mn26:16.20 -->

Why don’t I make an effort to realize the same teaching that Rāma said he had realized with his own insight?’

<!-- @segment mn26:16.21 -->

I quickly realized that teaching with my own insight, and lived having achieved it.

<!-- @segment mn26:16.22 -->

So I approached Uddaka son of Rāma and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn26:16.23 -->

‘Reverend, had Rāma realized this teaching with his own insight up to this point, and declared having achieved it?’

<!-- @segment mn26:16.24 -->

‘He had, reverend.’

<!-- @segment mn26:16.25 -->

‘I too have realized this teaching with my own insight up to this point, and live having achieved it.’

<!-- @segment mn26:16.26 -->

‘We are fortunate, reverend, so very fortunate

<!-- @segment mn26:16.27 -->

to see a venerable such as yourself as one of our spiritual companions!

<!-- @segment mn26:16.28 -->

So the teaching that Rāma had realized with his own insight, and declared having achieved it, you’ve realized with your own insight, and dwell having achieved it.

<!-- @segment mn26:16.29 -->

The teaching that you’ve realized with your own insight, and dwell having achieved it, Rāma had realized with his own insight, and declared having achieved it.

<!-- @segment mn26:16.30 -->

So the teaching that Rāma directly knew, you know, and the teaching you know, Rāma directly knew.

<!-- @segment mn26:16.31 -->

Rāma was like you and you are like Rāma.

<!-- @segment mn26:16.32 -->

Come now, reverend! You should lead this community.’

<!-- @segment mn26:16.33 -->

And that is how my spiritual companion Uddaka son of Rāma placed me in the position of a tutor and honored me with high praise.

<!-- @segment mn26:16.34 -->

Then it occurred to me,

<!-- @segment mn26:16.35 -->

‘This teaching doesn’t lead to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. It only leads as far as rebirth in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception.’

<!-- @segment mn26:16.36 -->

Realizing that this teaching was inadequate, I left disappointed.

<!-- @segment mn26:17.1 -->

I set out to discover what is skillful, seeking the supreme state of sublime peace. Traveling stage by stage in the Magadhan lands, I arrived at the town of Senā in Uruvelā.

<!-- @segment mn26:17.2 -->

There I saw a delightful park, a lovely grove with a flowing river that was clean and charming, with smooth banks. And nearby was a village to resort to for alms.

<!-- @segment mn26:17.3 -->

Then it occurred to me,

<!-- @segment mn26:17.4 -->

‘This park is truly delightful, a lovely grove with a flowing river that’s clean and charming, with smooth banks. And nearby there’s a village to resort to for alms.

<!-- @segment mn26:17.5 -->

This is good enough for striving for a gentleman wanting to strive.’

<!-- @segment mn26:17.6 -->

So I sat down right there, thinking,

<!-- @segment mn26:17.7 -->

‘This is good enough for striving.’

<!-- @segment mn26:18.1 -->

And so, being myself liable to be reborn, understanding the drawbacks in being liable to be reborn, I sought that which is free of rebirth, the supreme sanctuary from the yoke, extinguishment—and I found it. Being myself liable to grow old, fall sick, die, sorrow, and become corrupted, understanding the drawbacks in these things, I sought that which is free of old age, sickness, death, sorrow, and corruption, the supreme sanctuary from the yoke, extinguishment—and I found it.

<!-- @segment mn26:18.2 -->

Knowledge and vision arose in me:

<!-- @segment mn26:18.3 -->

‘My freedom is unshakable; this is my last rebirth; now there’ll be no more future lives.’

<!-- @segment mn26:19.1 -->

Then it occurred to me,

<!-- @segment mn26:19.2 -->

‘This principle I have discovered is deep, hard to see, hard to understand, peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible to the astute.

<!-- @segment mn26:19.3 -->

But people like clinging, they love it and enjoy it.

<!-- @segment mn26:19.4 -->

It’s hard for them to see this topic; that is, specific conditionality, dependent origination.

<!-- @segment mn26:19.5 -->

It’s also hard for them to see this topic; that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment.

<!-- @segment mn26:19.6 -->

And if I were to teach this principle, others might not understand me, which would be wearying and troublesome for me.’

<!-- @segment mn26:19.7 -->

And then these verses, which were neither supernaturally inspired, nor learned before in the past, occurred to me:

<!-- @segment mn26:19.8 -->

‘I’ve struggled hard to realize this,

<!-- @segment mn26:19.9 -->

enough with trying to explain it!

<!-- @segment mn26:19.10 -->

Those mired in greed and hate

<!-- @segment mn26:19.11 -->

can’t really understand this teaching.

<!-- @segment mn26:19.12 -->

It goes against the stream, subtle,

<!-- @segment mn26:19.13 -->

deep, obscure, and very fine.

<!-- @segment mn26:19.14 -->

Those besotted by greed cannot see,

<!-- @segment mn26:19.15 -->

for they’re cloaked in a mass of darkness.’

<!-- @segment mn26:19.16 -->

So, as I reflected like this, my mind inclined to remaining passive, not to teaching the Dhamma.

<!-- @segment mn26:20.1 -->

Then the divinity Sahampati, knowing my train of thought, thought,

<!-- @segment mn26:20.2 -->

‘Oh lord! The world will be lost, the world will perish! For the mind of the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, inclines to remaining passive, not to teaching the Dhamma.’

<!-- @segment mn26:20.3 -->

Then, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from the realm of divinity and reappeared in front of me.

<!-- @segment mn26:20.4 -->

He arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his cupped palms toward me, and said,

<!-- @segment mn26:20.5 -->

‘Sir, let the Blessed One teach the Dhamma! Let the Holy One teach the Dhamma!

<!-- @segment mn26:20.6 -->

There are beings with little dust in their eyes. They’re in decline because they haven’t heard the teaching.

<!-- @segment mn26:20.7 -->

There will be those who understand the teaching!’

<!-- @segment mn26:20.8 -->

That’s what the divinity Sahampati said.

<!-- @segment mn26:20.9 -->

Then he went on to say:

<!-- @segment mn26:20.10 -->

‘Among the Magadhans there appeared in the past

<!-- @segment mn26:20.11 -->

an impure teaching thought up by the stained.

<!-- @segment mn26:20.12 -->

Fling open the door to freedom from death!

<!-- @segment mn26:20.13 -->

Let them hear the teaching <j>the immaculate one discovered.

<!-- @segment mn26:20.14 -->

Standing high on a rocky mountain,

<!-- @segment mn26:20.15 -->

you can see the people all around.

<!-- @segment mn26:20.16 -->

In just the same way, All-seer, so intelligent,

<!-- @segment mn26:20.17 -->

having ascended the Temple of Truth,

<!-- @segment mn26:20.18 -->

rid of sorrow, look upon the people

<!-- @segment mn26:20.19 -->

swamped with sorrow, overcome by rebirth and old age.

<!-- @segment mn26:20.20 -->

Rise, hero! Victor in battle, caravan leader,

<!-- @segment mn26:20.21 -->

wander the world cleared of debt.

<!-- @segment mn26:20.22 -->

Let the Blessed One teach the Dhamma!

<!-- @segment mn26:20.23 -->

There will be those who understand!’

<!-- @segment mn26:21.1 -->

Then, understanding the Divinity’s invitation, I surveyed the world with the eye of a Buddha, because of my compassion for sentient beings.

<!-- @segment mn26:21.2 -->

And I saw sentient beings with little dust in their eyes, and some with much dust in their eyes; with keen faculties and with weak faculties, with good qualities and with bad qualities, easy to teach and hard to teach. And some of them lived seeing the danger in the fault to do with the next world, while others did not.

<!-- @segment mn26:21.3 -->

It’s like a pool with blue water lilies, or pink or white lotuses. Some of them sprout and grow in the water without rising above it, thriving underwater. Some of them sprout and grow in the water reaching the water’s surface. And some of them sprout and grow in the water but rise up above the water and stand with no water clinging to them.

<!-- @segment mn26:21.4 -->

In the same way, I saw sentient beings with little dust in their eyes, and some with much dust in their eyes.

<!-- @segment mn26:21.5 -->

Then I replied in verse to the divinity Sahampati:

<!-- @segment mn26:21.6 -->

‘Flung open are the doors to freedom from death!

<!-- @segment mn26:21.7 -->

Let those with ears to hear commit to faith.

<!-- @segment mn26:21.8 -->

Thinking it would be troublesome, Divinity, <j>I did not teach

<!-- @segment mn26:21.9 -->

the sophisticated, sublime Dhamma among mankind.’

<!-- @segment mn26:21.10 -->

Then the divinity Sahampati, knowing that his request for me to teach the Dhamma had been granted, bowed and respectfully circled me, keeping me on his right, before vanishing right there.

<!-- @segment mn26:22.1 -->

Then I thought,

<!-- @segment mn26:22.2 -->

‘Who should I teach first of all?

<!-- @segment mn26:22.3 -->

Who will quickly understand this teaching?’

<!-- @segment mn26:22.4 -->

Then it occurred to me,

<!-- @segment mn26:22.5 -->

‘That Āḷāra Kālāma is astute, competent, clever, and has long had little dust in his eyes.

<!-- @segment mn26:22.6 -->

Why don’t I teach him first of all?

<!-- @segment mn26:22.7 -->

He’ll quickly understand the teaching.’

<!-- @segment mn26:22.8 -->

But a deity came to me and said,

<!-- @segment mn26:22.9 -->

‘Sir, Āḷāra Kālāma passed away seven days ago.’

<!-- @segment mn26:22.10 -->

And knowledge and vision arose in me,

<!-- @segment mn26:22.11 -->

‘Āḷāra Kālāma passed away seven days ago.’

<!-- @segment mn26:22.12 -->

I thought,

<!-- @segment mn26:22.13 -->

‘This is a great loss for Āḷāra Kālāma.

<!-- @segment mn26:22.14 -->

If he had heard the teaching, he would have understood it quickly.’

<!-- @segment mn26:23.1 -->

Then I thought,

<!-- @segment mn26:23.2 -->

‘Who should I teach first of all?

<!-- @segment mn26:23.3 -->

Who will quickly understand this teaching?’

<!-- @segment mn26:23.4 -->

Then it occurred to me,

<!-- @segment mn26:23.5 -->

‘That Uddaka son of Rāma is astute, competent, clever, and has long had little dust in his eyes.

<!-- @segment mn26:23.6 -->

Why don’t I teach him first of all?

<!-- @segment mn26:23.7 -->

He’ll quickly understand the teaching.’

<!-- @segment mn26:23.8 -->

But a deity came to me and said,

<!-- @segment mn26:23.9 -->

‘Sir, Uddaka son of Rāma passed away just last night.’

<!-- @segment mn26:23.10 -->

And knowledge and vision arose in me,

<!-- @segment mn26:23.11 -->

‘Uddaka son of Rāma passed away just last night.’

<!-- @segment mn26:23.12 -->

I thought,

<!-- @segment mn26:23.13 -->

‘This is a great loss for Uddaka.

<!-- @segment mn26:23.14 -->

If he had heard the teaching, he would have understood it quickly.’

<!-- @segment mn26:24.1 -->

Then I thought,

<!-- @segment mn26:24.2 -->

‘Who should I teach first of all?

<!-- @segment mn26:24.3 -->

Who will quickly understand this teaching?’

<!-- @segment mn26:24.4 -->

Then it occurred to me,

<!-- @segment mn26:24.5 -->

‘The group of five mendicants were very helpful to me. They looked after me during my time of resolute striving.

<!-- @segment mn26:24.6 -->

Why don’t I teach them first of all?’

<!-- @segment mn26:24.7 -->

Then I thought,

<!-- @segment mn26:24.8 -->

‘Where are the group of five mendicants staying these days?’

<!-- @segment mn26:24.9 -->

With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman I saw that the group of five mendicants were staying near Varanasi, in the deer park at Isipatana.

<!-- @segment mn26:24.10 -->

So, when I had stayed in Uruvelā as long as I pleased, I set out for Varanasi.

<!-- @segment mn26:25.1 -->

While I was traveling along the road between Gayā and Bodhgaya, the Ājīvaka ascetic Upaka saw me

<!-- @segment mn26:25.2 -->

and said,

<!-- @segment mn26:25.3 -->

‘Reverend, your faculties are so very clear, and your complexion is pure and bright.

<!-- @segment mn26:25.4 -->

In whose name have you gone forth, reverend? Who is your Teacher? Whose teaching do you believe in?’

<!-- @segment mn26:25.5 -->

I replied to Upaka in verse:

<!-- @segment mn26:25.6 -->

‘I am the vanquisher of all, the knower of all,

<!-- @segment mn26:25.7 -->

unsullied in the midst of all things.

<!-- @segment mn26:25.8 -->

I’ve given up all, freed through the ending of craving.

<!-- @segment mn26:25.9 -->

Since I know for myself, whose follower should I be?

<!-- @segment mn26:25.10 -->

I have no tutor.

<!-- @segment mn26:25.11 -->

There is no-one like me.

<!-- @segment mn26:25.12 -->

In the world with its gods,

<!-- @segment mn26:25.13 -->

I have no rival.

<!-- @segment mn26:25.14 -->

For in this world, I am the perfected one;

<!-- @segment mn26:25.15 -->

I am the supreme Teacher.

<!-- @segment mn26:25.16 -->

I alone am fully awakened,

<!-- @segment mn26:25.17 -->

cooled, quenched.

<!-- @segment mn26:25.18 -->

I am going to the city of Kāsi

<!-- @segment mn26:25.19 -->

to roll forth the Wheel of Dhamma.

<!-- @segment mn26:25.20 -->

In this world that is so blind,

<!-- @segment mn26:25.21 -->

I’ll beat the drum of freedom from death!’

<!-- @segment mn26:25.22 -->

‘According to what you claim, reverend, you ought to be the Infinite Victor.’

<!-- @segment mn26:25.23 -->

‘The victors are those who, like me,

<!-- @segment mn26:25.24 -->

have reached the ending of defilements.

<!-- @segment mn26:25.25 -->

I have conquered bad qualities, Upaka—

<!-- @segment mn26:25.26 -->

that’s why I’m a victor.’

<!-- @segment mn26:25.27 -->

When I had spoken, Upaka said: ‘If you say so, reverend.’ Shaking his head, he took a wrong turn and left.

<!-- @segment mn26:26.1 -->

Traveling stage by stage, I arrived at Varanasi, and went to see the group of five mendicants in the deer park at Isipatana.

<!-- @segment mn26:26.2 -->

The group of five mendicants saw me coming off in the distance

<!-- @segment mn26:26.3 -->

and stopped each other, saying,

<!-- @segment mn26:26.4 -->

‘Here comes the ascetic Gotama. He’s so indulgent; he strayed from the struggle and returned to indulgence.

<!-- @segment mn26:26.5 -->

We shouldn’t bow to him or rise for him or receive his bowl and robe.

<!-- @segment mn26:26.6 -->

But we can set out a seat; he can sit if he likes.’

<!-- @segment mn26:26.7 -->

Yet as I drew closer, the group of five mendicants were unable to stop themselves per their own agreement.

<!-- @segment mn26:26.8 -->

Some came out to greet me and receive my bowl and robe, some spread out a seat, while others set out water for washing my feet.

<!-- @segment mn26:26.9 -->

But they still addressed me by name and as ‘reverend’.

<!-- @segment mn26:27.1 -->

So I said to them,

<!-- @segment mn26:27.2 -->

‘Mendicants, don’t address me by name and as “reverend”.

<!-- @segment mn26:27.3 -->

The Realized One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn26:27.4 -->

Listen up, mendicants: I have achieved freedom from death! I shall instruct you, I will teach you the Dhamma.

<!-- @segment mn26:27.5 -->

By practicing as instructed you will soon realize the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. You will live having achieved with your own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.’

<!-- @segment mn26:27.6 -->

But they said to me,

<!-- @segment mn26:27.7 -->

‘Reverend Gotama, even by that conduct, that practice, that grueling work you did not achieve any superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. How could you have achieved such a state now that you’ve become indulgent, strayed from the struggle and returned to indulgence?’

<!-- @segment mn26:27.8 -->

So I said to them,

<!-- @segment mn26:27.9 -->

‘The Realized One has not become indulgent, strayed from the struggle and returned to indulgence.

<!-- @segment mn26:27.10 -->

The Realized One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn26:27.11 -->

Listen up, mendicants: I have achieved freedom from death! I shall instruct you, I will teach you the Dhamma.

<!-- @segment mn26:27.12 -->

By practicing as instructed you will soon realize the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life.’

<!-- @segment mn26:27.13 -->

But for a second time they said to me,

<!-- @segment mn26:27.14 -->

‘Reverend Gotama … you’ve returned to indulgence.’

<!-- @segment mn26:27.15 -->

So for a second time I said to them,

<!-- @segment mn26:27.16 -->

‘The Realized One has not become indulgent …’

<!-- @segment mn26:27.17 -->



<!-- @segment mn26:27.18 -->

But for a third time they said to me,

<!-- @segment mn26:27.19 -->

‘Reverend Gotama, even by that conduct, that practice, that grueling work you did not achieve any superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. How could you have achieved such a state now that you’ve become indulgent, strayed from the struggle and returned to indulgence?’

<!-- @segment mn26:28.1 -->

So I said to them,

<!-- @segment mn26:28.2 -->

‘Mendicants, have you ever known me to speak like this before?’

<!-- @segment mn26:28.3 -->

‘No sir, we have not.’

<!-- @segment mn26:28.4 -->

‘The Realized One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn26:28.5 -->

Listen up, mendicants: I have achieved freedom from death! I shall instruct you, I will teach you the Dhamma.

<!-- @segment mn26:28.6 -->

By practicing as instructed you will soon realize the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. You will live having achieved with your own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.’

<!-- @segment mn26:29.1 -->

I was able to persuade the group of five mendicants.

<!-- @segment mn26:29.2 -->

Then sometimes I advised two mendicants, while the other three went for alms.

<!-- @segment mn26:29.3 -->

Then those three would feed all six of us with what they brought back.

<!-- @segment mn26:29.4 -->

Sometimes I advised three mendicants, while the other two went for alms.

<!-- @segment mn26:29.5 -->

Then those two would feed all six of us with what they brought back.

<!-- @segment mn26:30.1 -->

As the group of five mendicants were being advised and instructed by me like this, being themselves liable to be reborn, understanding the drawbacks in being liable to be reborn, they sought that which is free of rebirth, the supreme sanctuary from the yoke, extinguishment—and they found it. Being themselves liable to grow old, fall sick, die, sorrow, and become corrupted, understanding the drawbacks in these things, they sought that which is free of old age, sickness, death, sorrow, and corruption, the supreme sanctuary from the yoke, extinguishment—and they found it.

<!-- @segment mn26:30.2 -->

Knowledge and vision arose in them:

<!-- @segment mn26:30.3 -->

‘Our freedom is unshakable; this is our last rebirth; now there’ll be no more future lives.’

<!-- @segment mn26:31.1 -->

Mendicants, there are these five kinds of sensual stimulation.

<!-- @segment mn26:31.2 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment mn26:31.3 -->

Sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing.

<!-- @segment mn26:31.4 -->

Sounds known by the ear …

<!-- @segment mn26:31.5 -->

Smells known by the nose …

<!-- @segment mn26:31.6 -->

Tastes known by the tongue …

<!-- @segment mn26:31.7 -->

Touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing.

<!-- @segment mn26:31.8 -->

These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

<!-- @segment mn26:32.1 -->

There are ascetics and brahmins who enjoy these five kinds of sensual stimulation tied, infatuated, attached, blind to the drawbacks, and not understanding the escape. You should understand that they

<!-- @segment mn26:32.2 -->

have met with calamity and disaster, and the Wicked One can do with them what he wants.

<!-- @segment mn26:32.3 -->

Suppose a deer in the wilderness was lying caught on a pile of snares.

<!-- @segment mn26:32.4 -->

You’d know that it

<!-- @segment mn26:32.5 -->

has met with calamity and disaster, and the hunter can do with them what he wants.

<!-- @segment mn26:32.6 -->

And when the hunter comes, it cannot flee where it wants.

<!-- @segment mn26:32.7 -->

In the same way, there are ascetics and brahmins who enjoy these five kinds of sensual stimulation tied, infatuated, attached, blind to the drawbacks, and not understanding the escape. You should understand that they

<!-- @segment mn26:32.8 -->

have met with calamity and disaster, and the Wicked One can do with them what he wants.

<!-- @segment mn26:33.1 -->

There are ascetics and brahmins who enjoy these five kinds of sensual stimulation without being tied, infatuated, or attached, seeing the drawbacks, and understanding the escape. You should understand that they

<!-- @segment mn26:33.2 -->

haven’t met with calamity and disaster, and the Wicked One cannot do what he wants with them.

<!-- @segment mn26:33.3 -->

Suppose a deer in the wilderness was lying on a pile of snares without being caught.

<!-- @segment mn26:33.4 -->

You’d know that it

<!-- @segment mn26:33.5 -->

hasn’t met with calamity and disaster, and the hunter cannot do what he wants with them.

<!-- @segment mn26:33.6 -->

And when the hunter comes, it can flee where it wants.

<!-- @segment mn26:33.7 -->

In the same way, there are ascetics and brahmins who enjoy these five kinds of sensual stimulation without being tied, infatuated, or attached, seeing the drawbacks, and understanding the escape. You should understand that they

<!-- @segment mn26:33.8 -->

haven’t met with calamity and disaster, and the Wicked One cannot do what he wants with them.

<!-- @segment mn26:34.1 -->

Suppose there was a wild deer wandering in the forest that walked, stood, sat, and laid down in confidence.

<!-- @segment mn26:34.2 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment mn26:34.3 -->

Because it’s out of the hunter’s range.

<!-- @segment mn26:34.4 -->

In the same way, a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment mn26:34.5 -->

This is called a mendicant who has blinded Māra, put out his eyes without a trace, and gone where the Wicked One cannot see.

<!-- @segment mn26:35.1 -->

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment mn26:35.2 -->

This is called a mendicant who has blinded Māra …

<!-- @segment mn26:36.1 -->

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’

<!-- @segment mn26:36.2 -->

This is called a mendicant who has blinded Māra …

<!-- @segment mn26:37.1 -->

Furthermore, with the giving up of pleasure and pain and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

<!-- @segment mn26:37.2 -->

This is called a mendicant who has blinded Māra …

<!-- @segment mn26:38.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, enters and remains in the dimension of infinite space.

<!-- @segment mn26:38.2 -->

This is called a mendicant who has blinded Māra …

<!-- @segment mn26:39.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, enters and remains in the dimension of infinite consciousness.

<!-- @segment mn26:39.2 -->

This is called a mendicant who has blinded Māra …

<!-- @segment mn26:40.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, enters and remains in the dimension of nothingness.

<!-- @segment mn26:40.2 -->

This is called a mendicant who has blinded Māra …

<!-- @segment mn26:41.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, enters and remains in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception.

<!-- @segment mn26:41.2 -->

This is called a mendicant who has blinded Māra …

<!-- @segment mn26:42.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their defilements come to an end.

<!-- @segment mn26:42.2 -->

This is called a mendicant who has blinded Māra, put out his eyes without a trace, and gone where the Wicked One cannot see.

<!-- @segment mn26:42.3 -->

They’ve crossed over clinging to the world. And they walk, stand, sit, and lie down in confidence.

<!-- @segment mn26:42.4 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment mn26:42.5 -->

Because they’re out of the Wicked One’s range.”

<!-- @segment mn26:42.6 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn26:42.7 -->

Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said.
