---
slug: mn32
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Longer Discourse at Gosiṅga
---

<!-- @segment mn32:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn32:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the sal forest park at Gosiṅga, together with several well-known senior disciples, such as

<!-- @segment mn32:1.3 -->

the venerables Sāriputta, Mahāmoggallāna, Mahākassapa, Anuruddha, Revata, Ānanda, and others.

<!-- @segment mn32:2.1 -->

Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Mahāmoggallāna came out of retreat, went to Venerable Mahākassapa, and said,

<!-- @segment mn32:2.2 -->

“Come, Reverend Kassapa, let’s go to Venerable Sāriputta to hear the teaching.”

<!-- @segment mn32:2.3 -->

“Yes, reverend,” Mahākassapa replied.

<!-- @segment mn32:2.4 -->

Then, together with Venerable Anuruddha, they went to Sāriputta to hear the teaching.

<!-- @segment mn32:3.1 -->

Seeing them, Venerable Ānanda

<!-- @segment mn32:3.2 -->

went to Venerable Revata, told him what was happening,

<!-- @segment mn32:3.3 -->

and invited him also.

<!-- @segment mn32:3.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:3.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:3.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:4.1 -->

Sāriputta saw them coming off in the distance

<!-- @segment mn32:4.2 -->

and said to Ānanda,

<!-- @segment mn32:4.3 -->

“Come, Venerable Ānanda.

<!-- @segment mn32:4.4 -->

Welcome to Ānanda, the Buddha’s attendant, who is so close to the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn32:4.5 -->

Ānanda, the sal forest park at Gosiṅga is lovely, the night is bright, the sal trees are in full blossom, and heavenly scents seem to float on the air.

<!-- @segment mn32:4.6 -->

What kind of mendicant would grace this park?”

<!-- @segment mn32:4.7 -->

“Reverend Sāriputta, it’s a mendicant who is very learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and penetrating them theoretically.

<!-- @segment mn32:4.8 -->

And they teach the four assemblies in order to uproot the underlying tendencies with well-rounded and coherent words and phrases.

<!-- @segment mn32:4.9 -->

That’s the kind of mendicant who would grace this park.”

<!-- @segment mn32:5.1 -->

When he had spoken, Sāriputta said to Revata,

<!-- @segment mn32:5.2 -->

“Reverend Revata, Ānanda has answered according to his own inspiration.

<!-- @segment mn32:5.3 -->

And now we ask you the same question.”

<!-- @segment mn32:5.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:5.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:5.6 -->

“Reverend Sāriputta, it’s a mendicant who enjoys retreat and loves retreat. They’re committed to inner serenity of the heart, they don’t neglect absorption, they’re endowed with discernment, and they frequent empty huts.

<!-- @segment mn32:5.7 -->

That’s the kind of mendicant who would grace this park.”

<!-- @segment mn32:6.1 -->

When he had spoken, Sāriputta said to Anuruddha,

<!-- @segment mn32:6.2 -->

“Reverend Anuruddha, Revata has answered according to his own inspiration.

<!-- @segment mn32:6.3 -->

And now we ask you the same question.”

<!-- @segment mn32:6.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:6.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:6.6 -->

“Reverend Sāriputta, it’s a mendicant who surveys a thousandfold galaxy with clairvoyance that is purified and surpasses the human,

<!-- @segment mn32:6.7 -->

just as a person with clear eyes could survey a thousand orbits from the upper floor of a royal longhouse.

<!-- @segment mn32:6.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:6.9 -->

That’s the kind of mendicant who would grace this park.”

<!-- @segment mn32:7.1 -->

When he had spoken, Sāriputta said to Mahākassapa,

<!-- @segment mn32:7.2 -->

“Reverend Kassapa, Anuruddha has answered according to his own inspiration.

<!-- @segment mn32:7.3 -->

And now we ask you the same question.”

<!-- @segment mn32:7.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:7.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:7.6 -->

“Reverend Sāriputta, it’s a mendicant who lives in the wilderness, eats only almsfood, wears rag robes, and owns just three robes; and they praise these things. They are of few wishes, content, secluded, aloof, and energetic; and they praise these things. They are accomplished in ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom; and they praise these things.

<!-- @segment mn32:7.7 -->

That’s the kind of mendicant who would grace this park.”

<!-- @segment mn32:8.1 -->

When he had spoken, Sāriputta said to Mahāmoggallāna,

<!-- @segment mn32:8.2 -->

“Reverend Moggallāna, Mahākassapa has answered according to his own inspiration.

<!-- @segment mn32:8.3 -->

And now we ask you the same question.”

<!-- @segment mn32:8.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:8.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:8.6 -->

“Reverend Sāriputta, it’s when two mendicants engage in discussion about the teaching. They question each other and answer each other’s questions without faltering, and their discussion on the teaching flows on.

<!-- @segment mn32:8.7 -->

That’s the kind of mendicant who would grace this park.”

<!-- @segment mn32:9.1 -->

Then Mahāmoggallāna said to Sāriputta,

<!-- @segment mn32:9.2 -->

“Each of us has spoken from our heart.

<!-- @segment mn32:9.3 -->

And now we ask you:

<!-- @segment mn32:9.4 -->

Sāriputta, the sal forest park at Gosiṅga is lovely, the night is bright, the sal trees are in full blossom, and heavenly scents seem to float on the air.

<!-- @segment mn32:9.5 -->

What kind of mendicant would grace this park?”

<!-- @segment mn32:9.6 -->

“Reverend Moggallāna, it’s when a mendicant masters their mind and is not mastered by it.

<!-- @segment mn32:9.7 -->

In the morning, they abide in whatever meditation or attainment they want.

<!-- @segment mn32:9.8 -->

At midday,

<!-- @segment mn32:9.9 -->

and in the evening, they abide in whatever meditation or attainment they want.

<!-- @segment mn32:9.10 -->

Suppose that a ruler or their chief minister had a chest full of garments of different colors.

<!-- @segment mn32:9.11 -->

In the morning, they’d don whatever pair of garments they wanted.

<!-- @segment mn32:9.12 -->

At midday,

<!-- @segment mn32:9.13 -->

and in the evening, they’d don whatever pair of garments they wanted.

<!-- @segment mn32:9.14 -->

In the same way, a mendicant masters their mind and is not mastered by it.

<!-- @segment mn32:9.15 -->

In the morning, they abide in whatever meditation or attainment they want.

<!-- @segment mn32:9.16 -->

At midday,

<!-- @segment mn32:9.17 -->

and in the evening, they abide in whatever meditation or attainment they want.

<!-- @segment mn32:9.18 -->

That’s the kind of mendicant who would grace this park.”

<!-- @segment mn32:10.1 -->

Then Sāriputta said to those venerables,

<!-- @segment mn32:10.2 -->

“Each of us has spoken from the heart.

<!-- @segment mn32:10.3 -->

Come, reverends, let’s go to the Buddha, and inform him about this.

<!-- @segment mn32:10.4 -->

As he answers, so we’ll remember it.”

<!-- @segment mn32:10.5 -->

“Yes, reverend,” they replied.

<!-- @segment mn32:10.6 -->

Then those venerables went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. Venerable Sāriputta told the Buddha of how the mendicants had come to see him, and how he had asked Ānanda:

<!-- @segment mn32:11.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:11.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:11.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:11.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:11.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:11.6 -->

“‘Ānanda, the sal forest park at Gosiṅga is lovely, the night is bright, the sal trees are in full blossom, and heavenly scents seem to float on the air.

<!-- @segment mn32:11.7 -->

What kind of mendicant would grace this park?’

<!-- @segment mn32:11.8 -->

When I had spoken, Ānanda said to me:

<!-- @segment mn32:11.9 -->

‘Reverend Sāriputta, it’s a mendicant who is very learned …

<!-- @segment mn32:11.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:11.11 -->

That’s the kind of mendicant who would grace this park.’”

<!-- @segment mn32:11.12 -->

“Good, good, Sāriputta!

<!-- @segment mn32:11.13 -->

Ānanda answered in the right way for him.

<!-- @segment mn32:11.14 -->

For Ānanda is very learned …”

<!-- @segment mn32:11.15 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:12.1 -->

“Next I asked Revata the same question.

<!-- @segment mn32:12.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:12.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:12.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:12.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:12.6 -->

He said:

<!-- @segment mn32:12.7 -->

‘It’s a mendicant who enjoys retreat …

<!-- @segment mn32:12.8 -->

That’s the kind of mendicant who would grace this park.’”

<!-- @segment mn32:12.9 -->

“Good, good, Sāriputta!

<!-- @segment mn32:12.10 -->

Revata answered in the right way for him.

<!-- @segment mn32:12.11 -->

For Revata enjoys retreat …”

<!-- @segment mn32:13.1 -->

“Next I asked Anuruddha the same question.

<!-- @segment mn32:13.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:13.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:13.4 -->

He said:

<!-- @segment mn32:13.5 -->

‘It’s a mendicant who surveys the thousandfold galaxy with clairvoyance that is purified and surpasses the human …

<!-- @segment mn32:13.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:13.7 -->

That’s the kind of mendicant who would grace this park.’”

<!-- @segment mn32:13.8 -->

“Good, good, Sāriputta! Anuruddha answered in the right way for him.

<!-- @segment mn32:13.9 -->

For Anuruddha surveys the thousandfold galaxy with clairvoyance that is purified and surpasses the human.”

<!-- @segment mn32:14.1 -->

“Next I asked Mahākassapa the same question.

<!-- @segment mn32:14.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:14.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:14.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:14.5 -->

He said:

<!-- @segment mn32:14.6 -->

‘It’s a mendicant who lives in the wilderness … and is accomplished in the knowledge and vision of freedom; and they praise these things.

<!-- @segment mn32:14.7 -->

That’s the kind of mendicant who would grace this park.’”

<!-- @segment mn32:14.8 -->

“Good, good, Sāriputta!

<!-- @segment mn32:14.9 -->

Kassapa answered in the right way for him.

<!-- @segment mn32:14.10 -->

For Kassapa lives in the wilderness … and is accomplished in the knowledge and vision of freedom; and he praises these things.”

<!-- @segment mn32:15.1 -->

“Next I asked Mahāmoggallāna the same question.

<!-- @segment mn32:15.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:15.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:15.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:15.5 -->

He said:

<!-- @segment mn32:15.6 -->

‘It’s when two mendicants engage in discussion about the teaching …

<!-- @segment mn32:15.7 -->

That’s the kind of mendicant who would grace this park.’”

<!-- @segment mn32:15.8 -->

“Good, good, Sāriputta! Moggallāna answered in the right way for him.

<!-- @segment mn32:15.9 -->

For Moggallāna is a Dhamma speaker.”

<!-- @segment mn32:16.1 -->

When he had spoken, Moggallāna said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn32:16.2 -->

“Next, I asked Sāriputta:

<!-- @segment mn32:16.3 -->

‘Each of us has spoken according to our own inspiration.

<!-- @segment mn32:16.4 -->

And now we ask you:

<!-- @segment mn32:16.5 -->

Sāriputta, the sal forest park at Gosiṅga is lovely, the night is bright, the sal trees are in full blossom, and heavenly scents seem to float on the air.

<!-- @segment mn32:16.6 -->

What kind of mendicant would grace this park?’

<!-- @segment mn32:16.7 -->

When I had spoken, Sāriputta said to me:

<!-- @segment mn32:16.8 -->

‘Reverend Moggallāna, it’s when a mendicant masters their mind and is not mastered by it …

<!-- @segment mn32:16.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:16.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:16.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:16.12 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:16.13 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:16.14 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:16.15 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:16.16 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:16.17 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:16.18 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:16.19 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:16.20 -->

That’s the kind of mendicant who would grace this park.’”

<!-- @segment mn32:16.21 -->

“Good, good, Moggallāna!

<!-- @segment mn32:16.22 -->

Sāriputta answered in the right way for him.

<!-- @segment mn32:16.23 -->

For Sāriputta masters his mind and is not mastered by it …”

<!-- @segment mn32:16.24 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:16.25 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:16.26 -->



<!-- @segment mn32:17.1 -->

When he had spoken, Sāriputta asked the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn32:17.2 -->

“Sir, who has spoken well?”

<!-- @segment mn32:17.3 -->

“You’ve all spoken well in your own way.

<!-- @segment mn32:17.4 -->

However, listen to me also as to what kind of mendicant would grace this sal forest park at Gosiṅga.

<!-- @segment mn32:17.5 -->

It’s a mendicant who, after the meal, returns from almsround, sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight, and brings mindfulness to the present, thinking:

<!-- @segment mn32:17.6 -->

‘I will not break this sitting posture until my mind is freed from the defilements by not grasping!’

<!-- @segment mn32:17.7 -->

That’s the kind of mendicant who would grace this park.”

<!-- @segment mn32:17.8 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn32:17.9 -->

Satisfied, those venerables approved what the Buddha said.
