---
slug: mn33
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Longer Discourse on the Cowherd
---

<!-- @segment mn33:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn33:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment mn33:1.3 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,

<!-- @segment mn33:1.4 -->

“Mendicants!”

<!-- @segment mn33:1.5 -->

“Venerable sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment mn33:1.6 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment mn33:2.1 -->

“Mendicants, a cowherd with eleven factors can’t maintain and expand a herd of cattle.

<!-- @segment mn33:2.2 -->

What eleven?

<!-- @segment mn33:2.3 -->

It’s when a cowherd doesn’t know form, is unskilled in characteristics, doesn’t pick out flies’ eggs, doesn’t dress wounds, doesn’t spread smoke, doesn’t know the ford, doesn’t know satisfaction, doesn’t know the trail, is not skilled in ranges, milks dry, and doesn’t show extra respect to the bulls who are fathers and captains of the herd.

<!-- @segment mn33:2.4 -->

A cowherd with these eleven factors can’t maintain and expand a herd of cattle.

<!-- @segment mn33:3.1 -->

In the same way, a mendicant with eleven qualities can’t achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training.

<!-- @segment mn33:3.2 -->

What eleven?

<!-- @segment mn33:3.3 -->

It’s when a mendicant doesn’t know form, is unskilled in characteristics, doesn’t pick out flies’ eggs, doesn’t dress wounds, doesn’t spread smoke, doesn’t know the ford, doesn’t know satisfaction, doesn’t know the trail, is not skilled in ranges, milks dry, and doesn’t show extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment mn33:4.1 -->

And how does a mendicant not know form?

<!-- @segment mn33:4.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant doesn’t truly understand that all form is the four principal states, or form derived from the four principal states.

<!-- @segment mn33:4.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant doesn’t know form.

<!-- @segment mn33:5.1 -->

And how is a mendicant not skilled in characteristics?

<!-- @segment mn33:5.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant doesn’t understand that a fool is characterized by their deeds, and an astute person is characterized by their deeds.

<!-- @segment mn33:5.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant isn’t skilled in characteristics.

<!-- @segment mn33:6.1 -->

And how does a mendicant not pick out flies’ eggs?

<!-- @segment mn33:6.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant tolerates a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought that has arisen. They tolerate any bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen. They don’t give them up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them.

<!-- @segment mn33:6.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant doesn’t pick out flies’ eggs.

<!-- @segment mn33:7.1 -->

And how does a mendicant not dress wounds?

<!-- @segment mn33:7.2 -->

When a mendicant sees a sight with their eyes, they get caught up in the features and details.

<!-- @segment mn33:7.3 -->

Since the faculty of sight is left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure become overwhelming. They don’t practice restraint, they don’t protect the faculty of sight, and they don’t achieve its restraint.

<!-- @segment mn33:7.4 -->

When they hear a sound with their ears …

<!-- @segment mn33:7.5 -->

smell an odor with their nose …

<!-- @segment mn33:7.6 -->

taste a flavor with their tongue …

<!-- @segment mn33:7.7 -->

feel a touch with their body …

<!-- @segment mn33:7.8 -->

know an idea with their mind, they get caught up in the features and details.

<!-- @segment mn33:7.9 -->

Since the faculty of the mind is left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure become overwhelming. They don’t practice restraint, they don’t protect the faculty of the mind, and they don’t achieve its restraint.

<!-- @segment mn33:7.10 -->

That’s how a mendicant doesn’t dress wounds.

<!-- @segment mn33:8.1 -->

And how does a mendicant not spread smoke?

<!-- @segment mn33:8.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant doesn’t teach others the Dhamma in detail as they learned and memorized it.

<!-- @segment mn33:8.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant doesn’t spread smoke.

<!-- @segment mn33:9.1 -->

And how does a mendicant not know the ford?

<!-- @segment mn33:9.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant doesn’t from time to time go up to those mendicants who are very learned—inheritors of the heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the outlines—and ask them questions:

<!-- @segment mn33:9.3 -->

‘Why, sir, does it say this?

<!-- @segment mn33:9.4 -->

What does that mean?’

<!-- @segment mn33:9.5 -->

Those venerables don’t reveal what is hidden, clarify what is unclear, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters.

<!-- @segment mn33:9.6 -->

That’s how a mendicant doesn’t know the ford.

<!-- @segment mn33:10.1 -->

And how does a mendicant not know satisfaction?

<!-- @segment mn33:10.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant, when the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One are being taught, finds no inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and finds no joy connected with the teaching.

<!-- @segment mn33:10.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant doesn’t know satisfaction.

<!-- @segment mn33:11.1 -->

And how does a mendicant not know the trail?

<!-- @segment mn33:11.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant doesn’t truly understand the noble eightfold path.

<!-- @segment mn33:11.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant doesn’t know the trail.

<!-- @segment mn33:12.1 -->

And how is a mendicant not skilled in ranges?

<!-- @segment mn33:12.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant doesn’t truly understand the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.

<!-- @segment mn33:12.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant is not skilled in ranges.

<!-- @segment mn33:13.1 -->

And how does a mendicant milk dry?

<!-- @segment mn33:13.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant is invited by a householder to accept robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick, and that mendicant doesn’t know moderation in accepting.

<!-- @segment mn33:13.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant milks dry.

<!-- @segment mn33:14.1 -->

And how does a mendicant not show extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha?

<!-- @segment mn33:14.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant doesn’t consistently treat senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha with kindness by way of body, speech, and mind, both in public and in private.

<!-- @segment mn33:14.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn33:14.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn33:14.5 -->

That’s how a mendicant doesn’t show extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment mn33:14.6 -->

A mendicant with these eleven qualities can’t achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training.

<!-- @segment mn33:15.1 -->

A cowherd with eleven factors can maintain and expand a herd of cattle.

<!-- @segment mn33:15.2 -->

What eleven?

<!-- @segment mn33:15.3 -->

It’s when a cowherd knows form, is skilled in characteristics, picks out flies’ eggs, dresses wounds, spreads smoke, knows the ford, knows satisfaction, knows the trail, is skilled in ranges, doesn’t milk dry, and shows extra respect to the bulls who are fathers and captains of the herd.

<!-- @segment mn33:15.4 -->

A cowherd with these eleven factors can maintain and expand a herd of cattle.

<!-- @segment mn33:16.1 -->

In the same way, a mendicant with eleven qualities can achieve growth, improvement, and maturity in this teaching and training.

<!-- @segment mn33:16.2 -->

What eleven?

<!-- @segment mn33:16.3 -->

It’s when a mendicant knows form, is skilled in characteristics, picks out flies’ eggs, dresses wounds, spreads smoke, knows the ford, knows satisfaction, knows the trail, is skilled in ranges, doesn’t milk dry, and shows extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment mn33:17.1 -->

And how does a mendicant know form?

<!-- @segment mn33:17.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant truly understands that all form is the four principal states, or form derived from the four principal states.

<!-- @segment mn33:17.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant knows form.

<!-- @segment mn33:18.1 -->

And how is a mendicant skilled in characteristics?

<!-- @segment mn33:18.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant understands that a fool is characterized by their deeds, and an astute person is characterized by their deeds.

<!-- @segment mn33:18.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant is skilled in characteristics.

<!-- @segment mn33:19.1 -->

And how does a mendicant pick out flies’ eggs?

<!-- @segment mn33:19.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant doesn’t tolerate a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought that has arisen. They don’t tolerate any bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen, but give them up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them.

<!-- @segment mn33:19.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant picks out flies’ eggs.

<!-- @segment mn33:20.1 -->

And how does a mendicant dress wounds?

<!-- @segment mn33:20.2 -->

When a mendicant sees a sight with their eyes, they don’t get caught up in the features and details.

<!-- @segment mn33:20.3 -->

If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint.

<!-- @segment mn33:20.4 -->

When they hear a sound with their ears …

<!-- @segment mn33:20.5 -->

smell an odor with their nose …

<!-- @segment mn33:20.6 -->

taste a flavor with their tongue …

<!-- @segment mn33:20.7 -->

feel a touch with their body …

<!-- @segment mn33:20.8 -->

know an idea with their mind, they don’t get caught up in the features and details.

<!-- @segment mn33:20.9 -->

If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint.

<!-- @segment mn33:20.10 -->

That’s how a mendicant dresses wounds.

<!-- @segment mn33:21.1 -->

And how does a mendicant spread smoke?

<!-- @segment mn33:21.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant teaches others the Dhamma in detail as they learned and memorized it.

<!-- @segment mn33:21.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant spreads smoke.

<!-- @segment mn33:22.1 -->

And how does a mendicant know the ford?

<!-- @segment mn33:22.2 -->

It’s when from time to time a mendicant goes up to those mendicants who are very learned—inheritors of the heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the outlines—and asks them questions:

<!-- @segment mn33:22.3 -->

‘Why, sir, does it say this?

<!-- @segment mn33:22.4 -->

What does that mean?’

<!-- @segment mn33:22.5 -->

Those venerables reveal what is hidden, clarify what is unclear, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters.

<!-- @segment mn33:22.6 -->

That’s how a mendicant knows the ford.

<!-- @segment mn33:23.1 -->

And how does a mendicant know satisfaction?

<!-- @segment mn33:23.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant, when the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One are being taught, finds inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and finds joy connected with the teaching.

<!-- @segment mn33:23.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant knows satisfaction.

<!-- @segment mn33:24.1 -->

And how does a mendicant know the trail?

<!-- @segment mn33:24.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant truly understands the noble eightfold path.

<!-- @segment mn33:24.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant knows the trail.

<!-- @segment mn33:25.1 -->

And how is a mendicant skilled in ranges?

<!-- @segment mn33:25.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant truly understands the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.

<!-- @segment mn33:25.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant is skilled in ranges.

<!-- @segment mn33:26.1 -->

And how does a mendicant not milk dry?

<!-- @segment mn33:26.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant is invited by a householder to accept robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick,

<!-- @segment mn33:26.3 -->

and that mendicant knows moderation in accepting.

<!-- @segment mn33:26.4 -->

That’s how a mendicant doesn’t milk dry.

<!-- @segment mn33:27.1 -->

And how does a mendicant show extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha?

<!-- @segment mn33:27.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant consistently treats senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha with kindness by way of body, speech, and mind, both in public and in private.

<!-- @segment mn33:27.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn33:27.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn33:27.5 -->

That’s how a mendicant shows extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment mn33:27.6 -->

A mendicant with these eleven qualities can achieve growth, improvement, and maturity in this teaching and training.”

<!-- @segment mn33:27.7 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn33:27.8 -->

Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said.
