---
slug: mn37
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Shorter Discourse on the Ending of Craving
---

<!-- @segment mn37:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn37:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother in the Eastern Monastery.

<!-- @segment mn37:2.1 -->

And then Sakka, lord of gods, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him:

<!-- @segment mn37:2.2 -->

“Sir, how do you briefly define a mendicant who is freed through the ending of craving, who has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal, and is best among gods and humans?”

<!-- @segment mn37:3.1 -->

“Lord of gods, take a mendicant who has heard:

<!-- @segment mn37:3.2 -->

‘Nothing is worth insisting on.’

<!-- @segment mn37:3.3 -->

When a mendicant has heard that

<!-- @segment mn37:3.4 -->

nothing is worth insisting on,

<!-- @segment mn37:3.5 -->

they directly know all things. Directly knowing all things, they completely understand all things. Completely understanding all things, when they experience any kind of feeling—pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral—

<!-- @segment mn37:3.6 -->

they meditate observing impermanence, dispassion, cessation, and letting go in those feelings.

<!-- @segment mn37:3.7 -->

Meditating in this way, they don’t grasp at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment mn37:3.8 -->

Not grasping, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished.

<!-- @segment mn37:3.9 -->

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’

<!-- @segment mn37:3.10 -->

That’s how I briefly define a mendicant who is freed through the ending of craving, who has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal, and is best among gods and humans.”

<!-- @segment mn37:4.1 -->

Then Sakka, lord of gods, having approved and agreed with what the Buddha said, bowed and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before vanishing right there.

<!-- @segment mn37:5.1 -->

Now at that time Venerable Mahāmoggallāna was sitting not far from the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn37:5.2 -->

He thought,

<!-- @segment mn37:5.3 -->

“Did that spirit comprehend what the Buddha said when he agreed with him, or not?

<!-- @segment mn37:5.4 -->

Why don’t I find out?”

<!-- @segment mn37:5.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn37:6.1 -->

And then Venerable Mahāmoggallāna, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, vanished from the Eastern Monastery and reappeared among the gods of the thirty-three.

<!-- @segment mn37:7.1 -->

Now at that time Sakka was amusing himself in the Single Lotus Park, supplied and provided with a heavenly orchestra.

<!-- @segment mn37:7.2 -->

Seeing Mahāmoggallāna coming off in the distance,

<!-- @segment mn37:7.3 -->

he waved off the orchestra, approached Mahāmoggallāna, and said,

<!-- @segment mn37:7.4 -->

“Come, my good fellow Moggallāna! Welcome, my good fellow!

<!-- @segment mn37:7.5 -->

It’s been a long time since you took the opportunity to come here.

<!-- @segment mn37:7.6 -->

Sit, my good Moggallāna, here, a seat is ready.”

<!-- @segment mn37:7.7 -->

Mahāmoggallāna sat down on the seat spread out,

<!-- @segment mn37:7.8 -->

while Sakka took a low seat and sat to one side.

<!-- @segment mn37:7.9 -->

Mahāmoggallāna said to him,

<!-- @segment mn37:8.1 -->

“Kosiya, how did the Buddha briefly explain freedom through the ending of craving?

<!-- @segment mn37:8.2 -->

Please share this talk with me so that I can also get to hear it.”

<!-- @segment mn37:8.3 -->

“My good Moggallāna, I have many duties, and much to do,

<!-- @segment mn37:8.4 -->

not only for myself, but also for the gods of the thirty-three.

<!-- @segment mn37:8.5 -->

Still, what is properly heard, learned, attended, and memorized does not vanish all of a sudden.

<!-- @segment mn37:8.6 -->

Once upon a time, a battle was fought between the gods and the titans.

<!-- @segment mn37:8.7 -->

In that battle the gods won and the titans lost.

<!-- @segment mn37:8.8 -->

When I returned from that battle as a conqueror, I created the Palace of Victory.

<!-- @segment mn37:8.9 -->

The Palace of Victory has a hundred towers.

<!-- @segment mn37:8.10 -->

Each tower has seven hundred chambers.

<!-- @segment mn37:8.11 -->

Each chamber has seven nymphs.

<!-- @segment mn37:8.12 -->

Each nymph has seven maids.

<!-- @segment mn37:8.13 -->

Would you like to see the lovely Palace of Victory?”

<!-- @segment mn37:8.14 -->

Mahāmoggallāna consented with silence.

<!-- @segment mn37:9.1 -->

Then, putting Venerable Mahāmoggallāna in front, Sakka, lord of gods, and Vessavaṇa, the Great King, went to the Palace of Victory.

<!-- @segment mn37:9.2 -->

When they saw Moggallāna coming off in the distance, Sakka’s maids,

<!-- @segment mn37:9.3 -->

being discreet and prudent, each went to her own bedroom.

<!-- @segment mn37:10.1 -->

They were just like a daughter-in-law who is discreet and prudent when they see their father-in-law.

<!-- @segment mn37:10.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn37:10.3 -->

Then Sakka and Vessavaṇa encouraged Moggallāna to wander and explore the palace, saying,

<!-- @segment mn37:10.4 -->

“See, in the palace, my good Moggallāna, this lovely thing!

<!-- @segment mn37:10.5 -->

And that lovely thing!”

<!-- @segment mn37:10.6 -->

“That looks beautiful for the venerable Kosiya, as befits one who has made merit in the past.

<!-- @segment mn37:10.7 -->

Humans, when they see something lovely, also say:

<!-- @segment mn37:10.8 -->

‘It looks beautiful enough for the gods of the thirty-three!’

<!-- @segment mn37:10.9 -->

That looks beautiful for the venerable Kosiya, as befits one who has made merit in the past.”

<!-- @segment mn37:11.1 -->

Then Moggallāna thought,

<!-- @segment mn37:11.2 -->

“This spirit lives much too negligently.

<!-- @segment mn37:11.3 -->

Why don’t I stir up a sense of urgency in him?”

<!-- @segment mn37:11.4 -->

Then Moggallāna used his psychic power to make the Palace of Victory shake and rock and tremble with his big toe.

<!-- @segment mn37:11.5 -->

Then Sakka, Vessavaṇa, and the gods of the thirty-three, their minds full of wonder and amazement, thought,

<!-- @segment mn37:11.6 -->

“Oh lord, how incredible, how amazing!

<!-- @segment mn37:11.7 -->

The ascetic has such power and might that he makes the god’s home shake and rock and tremble with his big toe!”

<!-- @segment mn37:12.1 -->

Knowing that Sakka was shocked and awestruck, Moggallāna said to him,

<!-- @segment mn37:12.2 -->

“Kosiya, how did the Buddha briefly explain freedom through the ending of craving?

<!-- @segment mn37:12.3 -->

Please share this talk with me so that I can also get to hear it.”

<!-- @segment mn37:12.4 -->

“My good fellow Moggallāna, I approached the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn37:12.5 -->

‘Sir, how do you briefly define a mendicant who is freed with the ending of craving, who has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal, and is best among gods and humans?’

<!-- @segment mn37:13.1 -->

When I had spoken the Buddha said to me:

<!-- @segment mn37:13.2 -->

‘Lord of gods, it’s when a mendicant has heard:

<!-- @segment mn37:13.3 -->

“Nothing is worth insisting on.”

<!-- @segment mn37:13.4 -->

When a mendicant has heard that

<!-- @segment mn37:13.5 -->

nothing is worth insisting on,

<!-- @segment mn37:13.6 -->

they directly know all things. Directly knowing all things, they completely understand all things. Having completely understood all things, when they experience any kind of feeling—pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral—

<!-- @segment mn37:13.7 -->

they meditate observing impermanence, dispassion, cessation, and letting go in those feelings.

<!-- @segment mn37:13.8 -->

Meditating in this way, they don’t grasp at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment mn37:13.9 -->

Not grasping, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished.

<!-- @segment mn37:13.10 -->

They understand: “Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.”

<!-- @segment mn37:13.11 -->

That’s how I briefly define a mendicant who is freed through the ending of craving, who has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal, and is best among gods and humans.’

<!-- @segment mn37:13.12 -->

That’s how the Buddha briefly explained freedom through the ending of craving to me.”

<!-- @segment mn37:14.1 -->

Moggallāna approved and agreed with what Sakka said. As easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from among the gods of the thirty-three and reappeared in the Eastern Monastery.

<!-- @segment mn37:14.2 -->

Soon after Moggallāna left, Sakka’s maids said to him,

<!-- @segment mn37:14.3 -->

“Good fellow, was that the Blessed One, your Teacher?”

<!-- @segment mn37:14.4 -->

“No, it was not.

<!-- @segment mn37:14.5 -->

That was my spiritual companion Venerable Mahāmoggallāna.”

<!-- @segment mn37:14.6 -->

“You’re fortunate, good fellow, so very fortunate,

<!-- @segment mn37:14.7 -->

to have a spiritual companion of such power and might!

<!-- @segment mn37:14.8 -->

We can’t believe that’s not the Blessed One, your Teacher!”

<!-- @segment mn37:15.1 -->

Then Mahāmoggallāna went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn37:15.2 -->

“Sir, do you recall briefly explaining freedom through the ending of craving to a certain well-known and illustrious spirit?”

<!-- @segment mn37:15.3 -->

“I do, Moggallāna.” And the Buddha retold all that happened when Sakka came to visit him, adding:

<!-- @segment mn37:15.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn37:15.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn37:15.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn37:15.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn37:15.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn37:15.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn37:15.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn37:15.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn37:15.12 -->



<!-- @segment mn37:15.13 -->



<!-- @segment mn37:15.14 -->



<!-- @segment mn37:15.15 -->



<!-- @segment mn37:15.16 -->



<!-- @segment mn37:15.17 -->

“That’s how I recall briefly explaining freedom through the ending of craving to Sakka, lord of gods.”

<!-- @segment mn37:15.18 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn37:15.19 -->

Satisfied, Venerable Mahāmoggallāna approved what the Buddha said.
