---
slug: mn40
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Shorter Discourse at Assapura
---

<!-- @segment mn40:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn40:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Aṅgas, near the Aṅgan town named Assapura.

<!-- @segment mn40:1.3 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,

<!-- @segment mn40:1.4 -->

“Mendicants!”

<!-- @segment mn40:1.5 -->

“Venerable sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment mn40:1.6 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment mn40:2.1 -->

“Mendicants, people label you as ascetics.

<!-- @segment mn40:2.2 -->

And when they ask you what you are, you claim to be ascetics.

<!-- @segment mn40:2.3 -->

Given this label and this claim, you should train like this: ‘We will practice in the way that is proper for an ascetic. That way our label will be accurate and our claim correct.

<!-- @segment mn40:2.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn40:2.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn40:2.6 -->

The services of those whose robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick we enjoy shall be very fruitful and beneficial for them. And our going forth will not be barren, but will be fruitful and fertile.’

<!-- @segment mn40:2.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn40:3.1 -->

And how does a mendicant not practice in the way that is proper for an ascetic?

<!-- @segment mn40:3.2 -->

Any mendicant who has not given up covetousness, ill will, irritability, acrimony, disdain, contempt, jealousy, stinginess, deviousness, deceit, corrupt wishes, and wrong view

<!-- @segment mn40:3.3 -->

is not practicing in the way that is proper for an ascetic, I say. And that is due to not giving up these stains, defects, and dregs of an ascetic, these grounds for rebirth in places of loss, to be experienced in bad places.

<!-- @segment mn40:4.1 -->

I say that such a mendicant’s going forth may be compared to the kind of weapon called ‘deadborn’—double-edged, whetted with yellow arsenic—that has been covered and wrapped in an outer robe.

<!-- @segment mn40:4.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn40:4.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn40:5.1 -->

I say that you don’t deserve the label ‘outer robe wearer’ just because you wear an outer robe.

<!-- @segment mn40:5.2 -->

You don’t deserve the label ‘naked ascetic’ just because you go naked.

<!-- @segment mn40:5.3 -->

You don’t deserve the label ‘dust and dirt wearer’ just because you’re caked in dust and dirt.

<!-- @segment mn40:5.4 -->

You don’t deserve the label ‘water immerser’ just because you immerse yourself in water.

<!-- @segment mn40:5.5 -->

You don’t deserve the label ‘tree root dweller’ just because you stay at the root of a tree.

<!-- @segment mn40:5.6 -->

You don’t deserve the label ‘open air dweller’ just because you stay in the open air.

<!-- @segment mn40:5.7 -->

You don’t deserve the label ‘stander’ just because you continually stand.

<!-- @segment mn40:5.8 -->

You don’t deserve the label ‘interval eater’ just because you eat food at set intervals.

<!-- @segment mn40:5.9 -->

You don’t deserve the label ‘reciter’ just because you recite hymns.

<!-- @segment mn40:5.10 -->

You don’t deserve the label ‘matted-hair ascetic’ just because you have matted hair.

<!-- @segment mn40:6.1 -->

Imagine that just by wearing an outer robe someone with covetousness, ill will, irritability, acrimony, disdain, contempt, jealousy, stinginess, deviousness, deceit, corrupt wishes, and wrong view could give up these things. If that were the case, your friends and colleagues, relatives and kin would make you an outer robe wearer as soon as you were born. They’d encourage you:

<!-- @segment mn40:6.2 -->

‘Please, dearest, wear an outer robe! By doing so you will give up covetousness, ill will, irritability, acrimony, disdain, contempt, jealousy, stinginess, deviousness, deceit, corrupt wishes, and wrong view.’

<!-- @segment mn40:6.3 -->

But sometimes I see someone with these bad qualities who is an outer robe wearer. That’s why I say that you don’t deserve the label ‘outer robe wearer’ just because you wear an outer robe.

<!-- @segment mn40:6.4 -->

Imagine that just by going naked …

<!-- @segment mn40:6.5 -->

wearing dust and dirt …

<!-- @segment mn40:6.6 -->

immersing in water …

<!-- @segment mn40:6.7 -->

staying at the root of a tree …

<!-- @segment mn40:6.8 -->

staying in the open air …

<!-- @segment mn40:6.9 -->

standing continually …

<!-- @segment mn40:6.10 -->

eating at set intervals …

<!-- @segment mn40:6.11 -->

reciting hymns …

<!-- @segment mn40:6.12 -->

having matted hair someone with covetousness, ill will, irritability, acrimony, disdain, contempt, jealousy, stinginess, deviousness, deceit, corrupt wishes, and wrong view could give up these things. If that were the case, your friends and colleagues, relatives and kin would make you a matted-hair ascetic as soon as you were born. They’d encourage you:

<!-- @segment mn40:6.13 -->

‘Please, dearest, become a matted-hair ascetic! By doing so you will give up covetousness, ill will, irritability, hostility, disdain, contempt, jealousy, stinginess, deviousness, deceit, corrupt wishes, and wrong view.’

<!-- @segment mn40:6.14 -->

But sometimes I see someone with these bad qualities who is a matted-hair ascetic. That’s why I say that you don’t deserve the label ‘matted-hair ascetic’ just because you have matted hair.

<!-- @segment mn40:7.1 -->

And how does a mendicant practice in the way that is proper for an ascetic?

<!-- @segment mn40:7.2 -->

Any mendicant who has given up covetousness, ill will, irritability, acrimony, disdain, contempt, jealousy, stinginess, deviousness, deceit, corrupt wishes, and wrong view

<!-- @segment mn40:7.3 -->

is practicing in the way that is proper for an ascetic, I say. And that is due to giving up these stains, defects, and dregs of an ascetic, these grounds for rebirth in places of loss, to be experienced in bad places.

<!-- @segment mn40:8.1 -->

They see themselves purified from all these bad, unskillful qualities.

<!-- @segment mn40:8.2 -->

Seeing this, joy springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, they feel bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi.

<!-- @segment mn40:9.1 -->

They meditate spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.

<!-- @segment mn40:10-12.1 -->

They meditate spreading a heart full of compassion …

<!-- @segment mn40:10-12.2 -->

They meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing …

<!-- @segment mn40:10-12.3 -->

They meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.

<!-- @segment mn40:13.1 -->

Suppose there was a lotus pond with clear, sweet, cool water, clean, with smooth banks, delightful.

<!-- @segment mn40:13.2 -->

Then along comes a person—whether from the east, west, north, or south—struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched.

<!-- @segment mn40:13.3 -->

No matter what direction they come from, when they arrive at that lotus pond they would alleviate their thirst and heat exhaustion.

<!-- @segment mn40:13.4 -->

In the same way, suppose someone has gone forth from the lay life to homelessness—whether from a family of aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, or menials—and has arrived at the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One. Having developed love, compassion, rejoicing, and equanimity in this way they gain inner peace.

<!-- @segment mn40:13.5 -->

Because of that inner peace they are practicing the way proper for an ascetic, I say.

<!-- @segment mn40:14.1 -->

And suppose someone has gone forth from the lay life to homelessness—whether from a family of aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, or workers—

<!-- @segment mn40:14.2 -->

and they realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.

<!-- @segment mn40:14.3 -->

They’re an ascetic because of the ending of defilements.”

<!-- @segment mn40:14.4 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn40:14.5 -->

Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn40:14.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn40:14.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn40:15.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn40:15.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn40:15.3 -->
