---
slug: mn50
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Condemnation of Māra
---

<!-- @segment mn50:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn50:1.2 -->

At one time Venerable Mahāmoggallāna was staying in the land of the Bhaggas at Crocodile’s Bellow, in the deer park at Bhesakaḷā’s Wood.

<!-- @segment mn50:2.1 -->

At that time Moggallāna was walking mindfully in the open air.

<!-- @segment mn50:2.2 -->

Now at that time Māra the Wicked had got inside Moggallāna’s belly.

<!-- @segment mn50:2.3 -->

Moggallāna thought,

<!-- @segment mn50:2.4 -->

“Why now is my belly so very heavy,

<!-- @segment mn50:2.5 -->

like I’ve just eaten a load of beans?”

<!-- @segment mn50:2.6 -->

Then he stepped down from the walking path, entered his dwelling, sat down on the seat spread out,

<!-- @segment mn50:3.1 -->

and investigated inside himself.

<!-- @segment mn50:3.2 -->

He saw that Māra the Wicked had got inside his belly.

<!-- @segment mn50:3.3 -->

So he said to Māra,

<!-- @segment mn50:3.4 -->

“Come out, Wicked One,

<!-- @segment mn50:3.5 -->

come out!

<!-- @segment mn50:3.6 -->

Do not harass the Realized One or his disciple.

<!-- @segment mn50:3.7 -->

Don’t create lasting harm and suffering for yourself!”

<!-- @segment mn50:4.1 -->

Then Māra thought,

<!-- @segment mn50:4.2 -->

“This ascetic doesn’t really know me or see me when he tells me to come out.

<!-- @segment mn50:4.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:4.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:4.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:4.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:4.7 -->

Not even the Teacher could recognize me so quickly, so how could a disciple?”

<!-- @segment mn50:5.1 -->

Then Moggallāna said to Māra,

<!-- @segment mn50:5.2 -->

“I know you even when you’re like this, Wicked One. Do not think,

<!-- @segment mn50:5.3 -->

‘He doesn’t know me.’

<!-- @segment mn50:5.4 -->

You are Māra the Wicked.

<!-- @segment mn50:5.5 -->

And you think,

<!-- @segment mn50:5.6 -->

‘This ascetic doesn’t really know me or see me when he tells me to come out.

<!-- @segment mn50:5.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:5.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:5.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:5.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:5.11 -->

Not even the Teacher could recognize me so quickly, so how could a disciple?’”

<!-- @segment mn50:6.1 -->

Then Māra thought,

<!-- @segment mn50:6.2 -->

“This ascetic really does know me and see me when he tells me to come out.”

<!-- @segment mn50:6.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:6.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:6.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:6.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:6.7 -->

Then Māra came up out of Moggallāna’s mouth and stood against the door.

<!-- @segment mn50:7.1 -->

Moggallāna saw him there

<!-- @segment mn50:7.2 -->

and said,

<!-- @segment mn50:7.3 -->

“I see you even there, Wicked One. Do not think,

<!-- @segment mn50:7.4 -->

‘He doesn’t see me.’

<!-- @segment mn50:7.5 -->

That’s you, Wicked One, standing against the door.

<!-- @segment mn50:8.1 -->

Once upon a time, Wicked One, I was a Māra named Dūsī, and I had a sister named Kāḷī.

<!-- @segment mn50:8.2 -->

You were her son,

<!-- @segment mn50:8.3 -->

which made you my nephew.

<!-- @segment mn50:9.1 -->

At that time Kakusandha, the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha arose in the world.

<!-- @segment mn50:9.2 -->

Kakusandha had a fine pair of chief disciples named Vidhura and Sañjīva.

<!-- @segment mn50:9.3 -->

Of all the disciples of the Buddha Kakusandha,

<!-- @segment mn50:9.4 -->

none were the equal of Venerable Vidhura in teaching Dhamma.

<!-- @segment mn50:9.5 -->

And that’s how he came to be known as Vidhura.

<!-- @segment mn50:10.1 -->

But when Venerable Sañjīva had gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, he easily attained the cessation of perception and feeling.

<!-- @segment mn50:10.2 -->

Once upon a time, Sañjīva was sitting at the root of a certain tree having attained the cessation of perception and feeling.

<!-- @segment mn50:10.3 -->

Some cowherds, shepherds, farmers, and passers-by saw him sitting there

<!-- @segment mn50:10.4 -->

and said,

<!-- @segment mn50:10.5 -->

‘Oh lord, how incredible, how amazing!

<!-- @segment mn50:10.6 -->

This ascetic passed away while seated.

<!-- @segment mn50:10.7 -->

We should cremate him.’

<!-- @segment mn50:10.8 -->

They collected grass, wood, and cow-dung, heaped it all on Sañjīva’s body, set it on fire, and left.

<!-- @segment mn50:11.1 -->

Then, when the night had passed, Sañjīva emerged from that attainment, shook out his robes, and, since it was morning, he robed up and entered the village for alms.

<!-- @segment mn50:11.2 -->

Those cowherds, shepherds, farmers, and passers-by saw him wandering for alms

<!-- @segment mn50:11.3 -->

and said,

<!-- @segment mn50:11.4 -->

‘Oh lord, how incredible, how amazing!

<!-- @segment mn50:11.5 -->

This ascetic passed away while seated, and now he has come back to life!’

<!-- @segment mn50:11.6 -->

And that’s how he came to be known as Sañjīva.

<!-- @segment mn50:12.1 -->

Then it occurred to Māra Dūsī,

<!-- @segment mn50:12.2 -->

‘I don’t know the course of rebirth of these ethical mendicants of good character.

<!-- @segment mn50:12.3 -->

Why don’t I take possession of these brahmins and householders and say,

<!-- @segment mn50:12.4 -->

“Come, all of you, abuse, attack, harass, and trouble the ethical mendicants of good character.

<!-- @segment mn50:12.5 -->

Hopefully by doing this we can upset their minds so that Māra Dūsī can find a vulnerability.”’

<!-- @segment mn50:12.6 -->

And that’s exactly what he did.

<!-- @segment mn50:12.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:12.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:13.1 -->

Then those brahmins and householders abused, attacked, harassed, and troubled the ethical mendicants of good character:

<!-- @segment mn50:13.2 -->

‘These shavelings, fake ascetics, primitives, black spawn from the feet of our kinsman, say, “We practice absorption meditation! We practice absorption meditation!” Shoulders drooping, downcast, and dopey, they meditate and concentrate and contemplate and ruminate.

<!-- @segment mn50:13.3 -->

They’re just like an owl on a branch, which meditates and concentrates and contemplates and ruminates as it hunts a mouse.

<!-- @segment mn50:13.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:13.5 -->

They’re just like a jackal on a river-bank, which meditates and concentrates and contemplates and ruminates as it hunts a fish.

<!-- @segment mn50:13.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:13.7 -->

They’re just like a cat by an alley or a drain or a dustbin, which meditates and concentrates and contemplates and ruminates as it hunts a mouse.

<!-- @segment mn50:13.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:13.9 -->

They’re just like an unladen donkey by an alley or a drain or a dustbin, which meditates and concentrates and contemplates and ruminates.

<!-- @segment mn50:13.10 -->

In the same way, these shavelings, fake ascetics, primitives, black spawn from the feet of our kinsman, say, “We practice absorption meditation! We practice absorption meditation!” Shoulders drooping, downcast, and dopey, they meditate and concentrate and contemplate and ruminate.’

<!-- @segment mn50:13.11 -->

Most of the people who died at that time—when their body broke up, after death—were reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.

<!-- @segment mn50:14.1 -->

Then Kakusandha the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment mn50:14.2 -->

‘Mendicants, the brahmins and householders have been possessed by Māra Dūsī.

<!-- @segment mn50:14.3 -->

He told them to abuse you in the hope of upsetting your minds so that he can find a vulnerability.

<!-- @segment mn50:14.4 -->

Come, all of you mendicants, meditate spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, spread a heart full of love to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.

<!-- @segment mn50:14.5 -->

Meditate spreading a heart full of compassion …

<!-- @segment mn50:14.6 -->

Meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing …

<!-- @segment mn50:14.7 -->

Meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.’

<!-- @segment mn50:15.1 -->

When those mendicants were instructed and advised by the Buddha Kakusandha in this way, they went to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, where they meditated spreading a heart full of love …

<!-- @segment mn50:15.2 -->

compassion …

<!-- @segment mn50:15.3 -->

rejoicing …

<!-- @segment mn50:15.4 -->

equanimity.

<!-- @segment mn50:16.1 -->

Then it occurred to Māra Dūsī,

<!-- @segment mn50:16.2 -->

‘Even when I do this I don’t know the course of rebirth of these ethical mendicants of good character. Why don’t I take possession of these brahmins and householders and say,

<!-- @segment mn50:16.3 -->

“Come, all of you, honor, respect, esteem, and venerate the ethical mendicants of good character.

<!-- @segment mn50:16.4 -->

Hopefully by doing this we can upset their minds so that Māra Dūsī can find a vulnerability.”’

<!-- @segment mn50:17.1 -->

And that’s exactly what he did.

<!-- @segment mn50:17.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:17.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:17.4 -->

Then those brahmins and householders honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated the ethical mendicants of good character.

<!-- @segment mn50:17.5 -->

Most of the people who died at that time—when their body broke up, after death—were reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

<!-- @segment mn50:18.1 -->

Then Kakusandha the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment mn50:18.2 -->

‘Mendicants, the brahmins and householders have been possessed by Māra Dūsī.

<!-- @segment mn50:18.3 -->

He told them to venerate you

<!-- @segment mn50:18.4 -->

in the hope of upsetting your minds so that he can find a vulnerability.

<!-- @segment mn50:18.5 -->

Come, all you mendicants, meditate observing the ugliness of the body, perceiving the repulsiveness of food, perceiving dissatisfaction with the whole world, and observing the impermanence of all conditions.’

<!-- @segment mn50:19.1 -->

When those mendicants were instructed and advised by the Buddha Kakusandha in this way, they went to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, where they meditated observing the ugliness of the body, perceiving the repulsiveness of food, perceiving dissatisfaction with the whole world, and observing the impermanence of all conditions.

<!-- @segment mn50:20.1 -->

Then the Buddha Kakusandha robed up in the morning and, taking this bowl and robe, entered the village for alms with Venerable Vidhura as his second monk.

<!-- @segment mn50:21.1 -->

Then Māra Dūsī took possession of a certain boy, picked up a rock, and hit Vidhura on the head, cracking it open.

<!-- @segment mn50:21.2 -->

Then Vidhura, with blood pouring from his cracked skull, still followed behind the Buddha Kakusandha.

<!-- @segment mn50:21.3 -->

Then the Buddha Kakusandha turned to gaze back, the way that elephants do, saying,

<!-- @segment mn50:21.4 -->

‘This Māra Dūsī knows no limit.’

<!-- @segment mn50:21.5 -->

And as he was gazing, Māra Dūsī fell from that place and was reborn in the Great Hell.

<!-- @segment mn50:22.1 -->

Now that Great Hell is known by three names:

<!-- @segment mn50:22.2 -->

‘Related to the Six Fields of Contact’ and also ‘The Impaling With Spikes’ and also ‘Uniquely Painful’.

<!-- @segment mn50:22.3 -->

Then the wardens of hell came to me and said,

<!-- @segment mn50:22.4 -->

‘When spike meets spike in your heart,

<!-- @segment mn50:22.5 -->

you will know that

<!-- @segment mn50:22.6 -->

you’ve been roasting in hell for a thousand years.’

<!-- @segment mn50:23.1 -->

I roasted for many years, many centuries, many millennia in that Great Hell.

<!-- @segment mn50:23.2 -->

For ten thousand years I roasted in the annex of that Great Hell, experiencing the pain called ‘this is emergence’.

<!-- @segment mn50:23.3 -->

My body was in human form,

<!-- @segment mn50:23.4 -->

but I had the head of a fish.

<!-- @segment mn50:24.1 -->

What kind of hell was that,

<!-- @segment mn50:24.2 -->

where Dūsī was roasted

<!-- @segment mn50:24.3 -->

after attacking the disciple Vidhura

<!-- @segment mn50:24.4 -->

along with the brahmin Kakusandha?

<!-- @segment mn50:24.5 -->

There were 100 iron spikes,

<!-- @segment mn50:24.6 -->

each one uniquely painful.

<!-- @segment mn50:24.7 -->

That’s the kind of hell

<!-- @segment mn50:24.8 -->

where Dūsī was roasted

<!-- @segment mn50:24.9 -->

after attacking the disciple Vidhura

<!-- @segment mn50:24.10 -->

along with the brahmin Kakusandha.

<!-- @segment mn50:24.11 -->

Dark One, if you attack

<!-- @segment mn50:24.12 -->

a mendicant who directly knows this,

<!-- @segment mn50:24.13 -->

a disciple of the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn50:24.14 -->

you’ll fall into suffering.

<!-- @segment mn50:25.1 -->

There are mansions that last an eon

<!-- @segment mn50:25.2 -->

standing in the middle of a lake.

<!-- @segment mn50:25.3 -->

Sapphire-colored, brilliant,

<!-- @segment mn50:25.4 -->

they sparkle and shine.

<!-- @segment mn50:25.5 -->

Dancing there are nymphs

<!-- @segment mn50:25.6 -->

shining in all different colors.

<!-- @segment mn50:25.7 -->

Dark One, if you attack

<!-- @segment mn50:25.8 -->

a mendicant who directly knows this,

<!-- @segment mn50:25.9 -->

a disciple of the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn50:25.10 -->

you’ll fall into suffering.

<!-- @segment mn50:26.1 -->

I’m the one who, urged by the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn50:26.2 -->

shook the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother

<!-- @segment mn50:26.3 -->

with his big toe

<!-- @segment mn50:26.4 -->

as the Saṅgha of mendicants watched.

<!-- @segment mn50:26.5 -->

Dark One, if you attack

<!-- @segment mn50:26.6 -->

a mendicant who directly knows this,

<!-- @segment mn50:26.7 -->

a disciple of the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn50:26.8 -->

you’ll fall into suffering.

<!-- @segment mn50:27.1 -->

I’m the one who shook the Palace of Victory

<!-- @segment mn50:27.2 -->

with his big toe

<!-- @segment mn50:27.3 -->

owing to psychic power,

<!-- @segment mn50:27.4 -->

inspiring deities to awe.

<!-- @segment mn50:27.5 -->

Dark One, if you attack

<!-- @segment mn50:27.6 -->

a mendicant who directly knows this,

<!-- @segment mn50:27.7 -->

a disciple of the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn50:27.8 -->

you’ll fall into suffering.

<!-- @segment mn50:28.1 -->

I’m the one who asked Sakka

<!-- @segment mn50:28.2 -->

in the Palace of Victory:

<!-- @segment mn50:28.3 -->

‘Vāsava, I hope you recall

<!-- @segment mn50:28.4 -->

the one who is freed through the ending of craving?’

<!-- @segment mn50:28.5 -->

And I’m the one to whom Sakka

<!-- @segment mn50:28.6 -->

admitted the truth when asked.

<!-- @segment mn50:28.7 -->

Dark One, if you attack

<!-- @segment mn50:28.8 -->

a mendicant who directly knows this,

<!-- @segment mn50:28.9 -->

a disciple of the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn50:28.10 -->

you’ll fall into suffering.

<!-- @segment mn50:29.1 -->

I’m the one who asked the Divinity

<!-- @segment mn50:29.2 -->

in the Hall of Clear Right before the assembly:

<!-- @segment mn50:29.3 -->

‘Respectable sir, do you still have the same view

<!-- @segment mn50:29.4 -->

that you had in the past?

<!-- @segment mn50:29.5 -->

Or do you see the radiance

<!-- @segment mn50:29.6 -->

surpassing the realm of divinity?’

<!-- @segment mn50:29.7 -->

And I’m the one to whom the Divinity

<!-- @segment mn50:29.8 -->

truthfully admitted his progress:

<!-- @segment mn50:29.9 -->

‘Good fellow, I don’t have that view

<!-- @segment mn50:29.10 -->

that I had in the past.

<!-- @segment mn50:29.11 -->

I see the radiance

<!-- @segment mn50:29.12 -->

surpassing the realm of divinity.

<!-- @segment mn50:29.13 -->

So how could I say today

<!-- @segment mn50:29.14 -->

that I am permanent and eternal?’

<!-- @segment mn50:29.15 -->

Dark One, if you attack

<!-- @segment mn50:29.16 -->

a mendicant who directly knows this,

<!-- @segment mn50:29.17 -->

a disciple of the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn50:29.18 -->

you’ll fall into suffering.

<!-- @segment mn50:30.1 -->

I’m the one who touched the peak of Mount Meru

<!-- @segment mn50:30.2 -->

using the power of meditative liberation.

<!-- @segment mn50:30.3 -->

I’ve visited the forests of the people

<!-- @segment mn50:30.4 -->

who dwell in the land east of Videha.

<!-- @segment mn50:30.5 -->

Dark One, if you attack

<!-- @segment mn50:30.6 -->

a mendicant who directly knows this,

<!-- @segment mn50:30.7 -->

a disciple of the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn50:30.8 -->

you’ll fall into suffering.

<!-- @segment mn50:31.1 -->

Though a fire doesn’t think,

<!-- @segment mn50:31.2 -->

‘I’ll burn the fool!’

<!-- @segment mn50:31.3 -->

Still the fool who attacks

<!-- @segment mn50:31.4 -->

the fire gets burnt.

<!-- @segment mn50:31.5 -->

In the same way, Māra,

<!-- @segment mn50:31.6 -->

in attacking the Realized One,

<!-- @segment mn50:31.7 -->

you’ll only burn yourself,

<!-- @segment mn50:31.8 -->

like a fool touching the flames.

<!-- @segment mn50:31.9 -->

Māra’s done a bad thing

<!-- @segment mn50:31.10 -->

in attacking the Realized One.

<!-- @segment mn50:31.11 -->

Wicked One, do you imagine that

<!-- @segment mn50:31.12 -->

your wickedness won’t bear fruit?

<!-- @segment mn50:31.13 -->

Your deeds heap up wickedness

<!-- @segment mn50:31.14 -->

that will last a long time, terminator!

<!-- @segment mn50:31.15 -->

Give up on the Buddha, Māra!

<!-- @segment mn50:31.16 -->

And hold no hope for the mendicants!”

<!-- @segment mn50:31.17 -->

That is how, in the Bhesekaḷā grove,

<!-- @segment mn50:31.18 -->

the mendicant condemned Māra.

<!-- @segment mn50:31.19 -->

That spirit, downcast,

<!-- @segment mn50:31.20 -->

disappeared right there.

<!-- @segment mn50:31.21 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:31.22 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:32.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:32.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:32.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:32.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:33.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:33.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:33.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn50:33.4 -->
