---
slug: mn51
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Kandaraka
description: The Buddha teaches Pessa and the wanderer Kandaraka about four individuals who mortify themselves, others, both, or neither, praising the one who avoids torment and practices the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.
qualities: mindfulness, ethical conduct, collectedness, wisdom, examination
theme: training guideline, principle
---

<!-- @segment mn51:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn51:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Campā on the banks of the Gaggarā Lotus Pond together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants.

<!-- @segment mn51:1.3 -->

Then Pessa the elephant marshal’s son and Kandaraka the wanderer went to see the Buddha. When they had approached, Pessa bowed and sat down to one side.

<!-- @segment mn51:1.4 -->

But the wanderer Kandaraka exchanged greetings with the Buddha and stood to one side.

<!-- @segment mn51:1.5 -->

He looked around the mendicant Saṅgha, who were so very silent, and said to the Buddha:

<!-- @segment mn51:2.1 -->

“It’s incredible, worthy Gotama, it’s amazing!

<!-- @segment mn51:2.2 -->

How the mendicant Saṅgha has been led to practice properly by the worthy Gotama!

<!-- @segment mn51:2.3 -->

The perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas in the past or the future who lead the mendicant Saṅgha to practice properly at best do so

<!-- @segment mn51:2.4 -->

like the worthy Gotama does in the present.”

<!-- @segment mn51:2.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn51:2.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn51:3.1 -->

“That’s so true, Kandaraka! That’s so true!

<!-- @segment mn51:3.2 -->

The perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas in the past or the future who lead the mendicant Saṅgha to practice properly at best do so

<!-- @segment mn51:3.3 -->

like I do in the present.

<!-- @segment mn51:3.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn51:3.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn51:3.6 -->

For in this mendicant Saṅgha there are perfected mendicants, who have ended the defilements, completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their heart’s goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and are rightly freed through enlightenment.

<!-- @segment mn51:3.7 -->

And in this mendicant Saṅgha there are trainee mendicants who are consistently ethical, living consistently, alert, living alertly.

<!-- @segment mn51:3.8 -->

They meditate with their minds firmly established in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.

<!-- @segment mn51:3.9 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment mn51:3.10 -->

It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment mn51:3.11 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment mn51:3.12 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of the mind—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment mn51:3.13 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.”

<!-- @segment mn51:4.1 -->

When he had spoken, Pessa said to the Buddha:

<!-- @segment mn51:4.2 -->

“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing!

<!-- @segment mn51:4.3 -->

How well described by the Buddha are the four kinds of mindfulness meditation! They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment.

<!-- @segment mn51:4.4 -->

For we white-clothed laypeople also from time to time meditate with our minds well established in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.

<!-- @segment mn51:4.5 -->

We meditate observing an aspect of the body …

<!-- @segment mn51:4.6 -->

feelings …

<!-- @segment mn51:4.7 -->

mind …

<!-- @segment mn51:4.8 -->

principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment mn51:4.9 -->

It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing!

<!-- @segment mn51:4.10 -->

How the Buddha knows what’s best for sentient beings, even though humans continue to be so shady, rotten, and tricky.

<!-- @segment mn51:4.11 -->

For human beings are shady, sir,

<!-- @segment mn51:4.12 -->

while beasts are obvious.

<!-- @segment mn51:4.13 -->

For I can drive an elephant in training,

<!-- @segment mn51:4.14 -->

and while going back and forth in Campā it’ll try all the tricks, bluffs, ruses, and feints that it can.

<!-- @segment mn51:4.15 -->

But my bondservants, servants, and workers behave one way by body, another by speech, and their minds another.

<!-- @segment mn51:4.16 -->

It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing!

<!-- @segment mn51:4.17 -->

How the Buddha knows what’s best for sentient beings, even though humans continue to be so shady, rotten, and tricky.

<!-- @segment mn51:4.18 -->

For human beings are shady, sir,

<!-- @segment mn51:4.19 -->

while beasts are obvious.”

<!-- @segment mn51:5.1 -->

“That’s so true, Pessa! That’s so true!

<!-- @segment mn51:5.2 -->

For human beings are shady,

<!-- @segment mn51:5.3 -->

while beasts are obvious.

<!-- @segment mn51:5.4 -->

Pessa, these four individuals are found in the world.

<!-- @segment mn51:5.5 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment mn51:5.6 -->

One individual mortifies themselves, committed to the practice of mortifying themselves.

<!-- @segment mn51:5.7 -->

One individual mortifies others, committed to the practice of mortifying others.

<!-- @segment mn51:5.8 -->

One individual mortifies themselves and others, committed to the practice of mortifying themselves and others.

<!-- @segment mn51:5.9 -->

One individual doesn’t mortify either themselves or others, committed to the practice of not mortifying themselves or others.

<!-- @segment mn51:5.10 -->

They live without wishes in this very life, quenched, cooled, experiencing bliss, with self become divine.

<!-- @segment mn51:5.11 -->

Which one of these four individuals do you like the sound of?”

<!-- @segment mn51:5.12 -->

“Sir, I don’t like the sound of the first three individuals.

<!-- @segment mn51:5.13 -->



<!-- @segment mn51:5.14 -->



<!-- @segment mn51:5.15 -->



<!-- @segment mn51:5.16 -->

I only like the sound of the last individual, who doesn’t mortify either themselves or others.”

<!-- @segment mn51:6.1 -->

“But why don’t you like the sound of those three individuals?”

<!-- @segment mn51:6.2 -->

“Sir, the individual who mortifies themselves does so even though they want to be happy and recoil from pain.

<!-- @segment mn51:6.3 -->

That’s why I don’t like the sound of that individual.

<!-- @segment mn51:6.4 -->

The individual who mortifies others does so even though others want to be happy and recoil from pain.

<!-- @segment mn51:6.5 -->

That’s why I don’t like the sound of that individual.

<!-- @segment mn51:6.6 -->

The individual who mortifies themselves and others does so even though both themselves and others want to be happy and recoil from pain.

<!-- @segment mn51:6.7 -->

That’s why I don’t like the sound of that individual.

<!-- @segment mn51:6.8 -->

The individual who doesn’t mortify either themselves or others—living without wishes, quenched, cooled, experiencing bliss, with self become divine—does not torment themselves or others, both of whom want to be happy and recoil from pain.

<!-- @segment mn51:6.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn51:6.10 -->

That’s why I like the sound of that individual.

<!-- @segment mn51:6.11 -->

Well, now, sir, I must go.

<!-- @segment mn51:6.12 -->

I have many duties, and much to do.”

<!-- @segment mn51:6.13 -->

“Please, Pessa, go at your convenience.”

<!-- @segment mn51:6.14 -->

And then Pessa the elephant marshal’s son approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. He rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

<!-- @segment mn51:7.1 -->

Then, not long after he had left, the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment mn51:7.2 -->

“Mendicants, Pessa the elephant marshal’s son is astute.

<!-- @segment mn51:7.3 -->

He has great wisdom.

<!-- @segment mn51:7.4 -->

If he had sat here an hour so that I could have analyzed these four individuals in detail, he would have greatly benefited.

<!-- @segment mn51:7.5 -->

Still, even with this much he has already greatly benefited.”

<!-- @segment mn51:7.6 -->

“Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One!

<!-- @segment mn51:7.7 -->

May the Buddha analyze these four individuals in detail. The mendicants will listen and remember it.”

<!-- @segment mn51:7.8 -->

“Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment mn51:7.9 -->

“Yes, sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment mn51:7.10 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment mn51:8.1 -->

“And what individual mortifies themselves, committed to the practice of mortifying themselves? It’s when an individual goes naked, ignoring conventions. They lick their hands, and don’t come or wait when called. They don’t consent to food brought to them, or food prepared for them, or an invitation for a meal.

<!-- @segment mn51:8.2 -->

They don’t receive anything from a pot or bowl; or from someone who keeps sheep, or who has a weapon or a shovel in their home; or where a couple is eating; or where there is a woman who is pregnant, breastfeeding, or who lives with a man; or where there’s a hound waiting or flies buzzing. They accept no fish or meat or beer or wine, and drink no fermented gruel.

<!-- @segment mn51:8.3 -->

They go to just one house for alms, taking just one mouthful, or two houses and two mouthfuls, up to seven houses and seven mouthfuls.

<!-- @segment mn51:8.4 -->

They feed on one saucer a day, two saucers a day, up to seven saucers a day.

<!-- @segment mn51:8.5 -->

They eat once a day, once every second day, up to once a week, and so on, even up to once a fortnight. They live committed to the practice of eating food at set intervals.

<!-- @segment mn51:8.6 -->

They eat herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce, rice bran, scum from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung. They survive on forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen fruit.

<!-- @segment mn51:8.7 -->

They wear robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags, lodh tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark, wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls’ wings.

<!-- @segment mn51:8.8 -->

They tear out their hair and beard, committed to this practice.

<!-- @segment mn51:8.9 -->

They constantly stand, turning down seats.

<!-- @segment mn51:8.10 -->

They squat, committed to the endeavor of squatting.

<!-- @segment mn51:8.11 -->

They lie on a mat of thorns, making a mat of thorns their bed.

<!-- @segment mn51:8.12 -->

They’re devoted to ritual bathing three times a day, including at dusk.

<!-- @segment mn51:8.13 -->

And so they live committed to practicing these various ways of mortifying and tormenting the body.

<!-- @segment mn51:8.14 -->

This is called an individual who mortifies themselves, being committed to the practice of mortifying themselves.

<!-- @segment mn51:9.1 -->

And what individual mortifies others, committed to the practice of mortifying others?

<!-- @segment mn51:9.2 -->

It’s when an individual is a slaughterer of sheep, pigs, or poultry, a hunter or trapper, a fisher, a bandit, an executioner, a butcher, a jailer, or someone with some other kind of cruel livelihood.

<!-- @segment mn51:9.3 -->

This is called an individual who mortifies others, being committed to the practice of mortifying others.

<!-- @segment mn51:10.1 -->

And what individual mortifies themselves and others, being committed to the practice of mortifying themselves and others?

<!-- @segment mn51:10.2 -->

It’s when an individual is an anointed aristocratic king or a well-to-do brahmin.

<!-- @segment mn51:10.3 -->

He has a new ceremonial hall built to the east of the citadel. He shaves off his hair and beard, dresses in a rough antelope hide, and smears his body with ghee and oil. Scratching his back with antlers, he enters the hall with his chief queen and the brahmin high priest.

<!-- @segment mn51:10.4 -->

There he lies on the bare ground strewn with grass.

<!-- @segment mn51:10.5 -->

The king feeds on the milk from one teat of a cow that has a calf of the same color. The chief queen feeds on the milk from the second teat. The brahmin high priest feeds on the milk from the third teat. The milk from the fourth teat is served to the sacred flame. The calf feeds on the leftovers.

<!-- @segment mn51:10.6 -->

He says:

<!-- @segment mn51:10.7 -->

‘Slaughter this many bulls, bullocks, heifers, goats, rams, and horses for the sacrifice! Fell this many trees and reap this much grass for the sacrificial equipment!’

<!-- @segment mn51:10.8 -->

His bondservants, servants, and workers do their jobs under threat of punishment and danger, weeping with tearful faces.

<!-- @segment mn51:10.9 -->

This is called an individual who mortifies themselves and others, being committed to the practice of mortifying themselves and others.

<!-- @segment mn51:11.1 -->

And what individual doesn’t mortify either themselves or others, but lives without wishes, quenched, cooled, experiencing bliss, with self become divine?

<!-- @segment mn51:12.1 -->

It’s when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.

<!-- @segment mn51:12.2 -->

He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others.

<!-- @segment mn51:12.3 -->

He proclaims a teaching that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure.

<!-- @segment mn51:13.1 -->

A householder hears that teaching, or a householder’s child, or someone reborn in a good family.

<!-- @segment mn51:13.2 -->

They gain faith in the Realized One

<!-- @segment mn51:13.3 -->

and reflect:

<!-- @segment mn51:13.4 -->

‘Life at home is cramped and dirty, life gone forth is wide open.

<!-- @segment mn51:13.5 -->

It’s not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell.

<!-- @segment mn51:13.6 -->

Why don’t I shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness?’

<!-- @segment mn51:13.7 -->

After some time they give up a large or small fortune, and a large or small family circle. They shave off hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment mn51:14.1 -->

Once they’ve gone forth, they take up the training and livelihood of the mendicants. They give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. They’re scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for all living beings.

<!-- @segment mn51:14.2 -->

They give up stealing. They take only what’s given, and expect only what’s given. They keep themselves clean by not thieving.

<!-- @segment mn51:14.3 -->

They give up unchastity. They are chaste, set apart, avoiding the vulgar act of sex.

<!-- @segment mn51:14.4 -->

They give up lying. They speak the truth and stick to the truth. They’re honest and dependable, and don’t trick the world with their words.

<!-- @segment mn51:14.5 -->

They give up backbiting. They don’t repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead, they reconcile those who are divided and support those who are united, delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony.

<!-- @segment mn51:14.6 -->

They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that’s mellow, pleasing to the ear, endearing, going to the heart, polite, likable and agreeable to the people.

<!-- @segment mn51:14.7 -->

They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.

<!-- @segment mn51:14.8 -->

They refrain from injuring plants and seeds.

<!-- @segment mn51:14.9 -->

They eat in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night and food at the wrong time.

<!-- @segment mn51:14.10 -->

They refrain from seeing shows of dancing, singing, and music .

<!-- @segment mn51:14.11 -->

They refrain from attiring and adorning themselves with garlands, fragrance, and makeup.

<!-- @segment mn51:14.12 -->

They refrain from high and luxurious beds.

<!-- @segment mn51:14.13 -->

They refrain from receiving gold and currency,

<!-- @segment mn51:14.14 -->

raw grains,

<!-- @segment mn51:14.15 -->

raw meat,

<!-- @segment mn51:14.16 -->

women and girls,

<!-- @segment mn51:14.17 -->

male and female bondservants,

<!-- @segment mn51:14.18 -->

goats and sheep,

<!-- @segment mn51:14.19 -->

chickens and pigs,

<!-- @segment mn51:14.20 -->

elephants, cows, horses, and mares,

<!-- @segment mn51:14.21 -->

and fields and land.

<!-- @segment mn51:14.22 -->

They refrain from running errands and messages;

<!-- @segment mn51:14.23 -->

buying and selling;

<!-- @segment mn51:14.24 -->

falsifying weights, metals, or measures;

<!-- @segment mn51:14.25 -->

bribery, fraud, cheating, and duplicity;

<!-- @segment mn51:14.26 -->

mutilation, murder, abduction, banditry, plunder, and violence.

<!-- @segment mn51:15.1 -->

They’re content with robes to look after the body and almsfood to look after the belly. Wherever they go, they set out taking only these things.

<!-- @segment mn51:15.2 -->

They’re like a bird: wherever it flies, wings are its only burden.

<!-- @segment mn51:15.3 -->

In the same way, a mendicant is content with robes to look after the body and almsfood to look after the belly. Wherever they go, they set out taking only these things.

<!-- @segment mn51:15.4 -->

When they have this entire spectrum of noble ethics, they experience a blameless happiness inside themselves.

<!-- @segment mn51:16.1 -->

When they see a sight with their eyes, they don’t get caught up in the features and details.

<!-- @segment mn51:16.2 -->

If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint.

<!-- @segment mn51:16.3 -->

When they hear a sound with their ears …

<!-- @segment mn51:16.4 -->

When they smell an odor with their nose …

<!-- @segment mn51:16.5 -->

When they taste a flavor with their tongue …

<!-- @segment mn51:16.6 -->

When they feel a touch with their body …

<!-- @segment mn51:16.7 -->

When they know an idea with their mind, they don’t get caught up in the features and details.

<!-- @segment mn51:16.8 -->

If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint.

<!-- @segment mn51:16.9 -->

When they have this noble sense restraint, they experience an unsullied bliss inside themselves.

<!-- @segment mn51:17.1 -->

They act with situational awareness when going out and coming back; when looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent.

<!-- @segment mn51:18.1 -->

When they have this entire spectrum of noble ethics, this noble contentment, this noble sense restraint, and this noble mindfulness and situational awareness,

<!-- @segment mn51:18.2 -->

they frequent a secluded lodging—a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw.

<!-- @segment mn51:19.1 -->

After the meal, they return from almsround, sit down cross-legged, set their body straight, and bring mindfulness to the present.

<!-- @segment mn51:19.2 -->

Giving up covetousness for the world, they meditate with a heart rid of covetousness, cleansing the mind of covetousness.

<!-- @segment mn51:19.3 -->

Giving up ill will, they meditate with a mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy for all living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will and malevolence.

<!-- @segment mn51:19.4 -->

Giving up dullness and drowsiness, they meditate with a mind rid of dullness and drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of dullness and drowsiness.

<!-- @segment mn51:19.5 -->

Giving up restlessness and remorse, they meditate without restlessness, their mind peaceful inside, cleansing the mind of restlessness and remorse.

<!-- @segment mn51:19.6 -->

Giving up doubt, they meditate having gone beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful qualities, cleansing the mind of doubt.

<!-- @segment mn51:20.1 -->

They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom.

<!-- @segment mn51:20.2 -->

Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment mn51:21.1 -->

As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment mn51:22.1 -->

And with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’

<!-- @segment mn51:23.1 -->

With the giving up of pleasure and pain and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

<!-- @segment mn51:24.1 -->

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward recollection of past lives.

<!-- @segment mn51:24.2 -->

They recollect many kinds of past lives, that is, one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. They remember: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details.

<!-- @segment mn51:25.1 -->

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment mn51:25.2 -->

With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds: ‘These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds.

<!-- @segment mn51:26.1 -->

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of defilements.

<!-- @segment mn51:26.2 -->

They truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’.

<!-- @segment mn51:27.1 -->

They truly understand: ‘These are defilements’ … ‘This is the origin of defilements’ … ‘This is the cessation of defilements’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements’.

<!-- @segment mn51:27.2 -->

Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance.

<!-- @segment mn51:27.3 -->

When they’re freed, they know they’re freed.

<!-- @segment mn51:27.4 -->

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’

<!-- @segment mn51:28.1 -->

This is called an individual who neither mortifies themselves or others, being committed to the practice of not mortifying themselves or others.

<!-- @segment mn51:28.2 -->

They live without wishes in this very life, quenched, cooled, experiencing bliss, with self become divine.”

<!-- @segment mn51:28.3 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn51:28.4 -->

Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said.
