---
slug: mn52
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Wealthy Citizen
---

<!-- @segment mn52:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn52:1.2 -->

At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Vesālī in the little village of Beluva.

<!-- @segment mn52:1.3 -->

Now at that time the householder Dasama, a wealthy citizen, had arrived at Pāṭaliputta on some business.

<!-- @segment mn52:2.1 -->

He went to the Chicken Monastery, approached a certain mendicant, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn52:2.2 -->

“Sir, where is Venerable Ānanda now staying?

<!-- @segment mn52:2.3 -->

For I want to see him.”

<!-- @segment mn52:2.4 -->

“Householder, Venerable Ānanda is staying near Vesālī in the little village of Beluva.”

<!-- @segment mn52:3.1 -->

Then the householder Dasama, having concluded his business there, went to the little village of Beluva in Vesālī to see Ānanda. He bowed, sat down to one side, and said to Ānanda:

<!-- @segment mn52:3.2 -->

“Honorable Ānanda, is there one thing that has been rightly explained by the Blessed One—who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha—practicing which a diligent, keen, and resolute mendicant’s mind is freed, their defilements are ended, and they arrive at the supreme sanctuary from the yoke?”

<!-- @segment mn52:3.3 -->

“There is, householder.”

<!-- @segment mn52:3.4 -->

“And what is that one thing?”

<!-- @segment mn52:4.1 -->

“Householder, it’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment mn52:4.2 -->

Then they reflect:

<!-- @segment mn52:4.3 -->

‘Even this first absorption is produced by choices and intentions.’

<!-- @segment mn52:4.4 -->

They understand: ‘But whatever is produced by choices and intentions is impermanent and liable to cessation.’

<!-- @segment mn52:4.5 -->

Abiding in that they attain the ending of defilements.

<!-- @segment mn52:4.6 -->

If they don’t attain the ending of defilements, with the ending of the five lower fetters they’re reborn spontaneously, because of their passion and love for that meditation. They are extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world.

<!-- @segment mn52:4.7 -->

This is one thing that has been rightly explained by the Blessed One—who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha—practicing which a diligent, keen, and resolute mendicant’s mind is freed, their defilements are ended, and they arrive at the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.

<!-- @segment mn52:5.1 -->

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption …

<!-- @segment mn52:5.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn52:5.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn52:5.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn52:6.1 -->

third absorption …

<!-- @segment mn52:6.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn52:6.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn52:6.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn52:7.1 -->

fourth absorption …

<!-- @segment mn52:7.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn52:7.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn52:7.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn52:8.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.

<!-- @segment mn52:8.2 -->

Then they reflect:

<!-- @segment mn52:8.3 -->

‘Even this heart’s release by love is produced by choices and intentions.’

<!-- @segment mn52:8.4 -->

They understand: ‘But whatever is produced by choices and intentions is impermanent and liable to cessation.’ …

<!-- @segment mn52:8.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn52:8.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn52:9.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of compassion …

<!-- @segment mn52:10.1 -->

rejoicing …

<!-- @segment mn52:11.1 -->

equanimity …

<!-- @segment mn52:11.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn52:11.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn52:11.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn52:11.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn52:11.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn52:12.1 -->

Furthermore, householder, a mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, enters and remains in the dimension of infinite space.

<!-- @segment mn52:12.2 -->

Then they reflect:

<!-- @segment mn52:12.3 -->

‘Even this attainment of the dimension of infinite space is produced by choices and intentions.’

<!-- @segment mn52:12.4 -->

They understand: ‘But whatever is produced by choices and intentions is impermanent and liable to cessation.’ …

<!-- @segment mn52:12.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn52:12.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn52:13.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, enters and remains in the dimension of infinite consciousness. …

<!-- @segment mn52:13.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn52:13.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn52:13.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn52:13.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn52:13.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn52:14.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, enters and remains in the dimension of nothingness.

<!-- @segment mn52:14.2 -->

Then they reflect:

<!-- @segment mn52:14.3 -->

‘Even this attainment of the dimension of nothingness is produced by choices and intentions.’

<!-- @segment mn52:14.4 -->

They understand: ‘But whatever is produced by choices and intentions is impermanent and liable to cessation.’

<!-- @segment mn52:14.5 -->

Abiding in that they attain the ending of defilements.

<!-- @segment mn52:14.6 -->

If they don’t attain the ending of defilements, with the ending of the five lower fetters they’re reborn spontaneously because of their passion and love for that meditation. They are extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world.

<!-- @segment mn52:14.7 -->

This too is one thing that has been rightly explained by the Blessed One—who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha—practicing which a diligent, keen, and resolute mendicant’s mind is freed, their defilements are ended, and they arrive at the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.”

<!-- @segment mn52:15.1 -->

When he said this, the householder Dasama said to Venerable Ānanda,

<!-- @segment mn52:15.2 -->

“Honorable Ānanda, suppose a person was looking for the entrance to a treasure trove. And all at once they’d come across eleven entrances!

<!-- @segment mn52:15.3 -->

In the same way, I was searching for the door to freedom from death. And all at once I found eleven doors to freedom from death for cultivation.

<!-- @segment mn52:15.4 -->

Suppose a person had a house with eleven doors. If the house caught fire they’d be able to flee to safety through any one of those doors.

<!-- @segment mn52:15.5 -->

In the same way, I’m able to flee to safety through any one of these eleven doors to freedom from death.

<!-- @segment mn52:15.6 -->

Sir, those of other religions seek a fee for the tutor. Why shouldn’t I make an offering to Venerable Ānanda?”

<!-- @segment mn52:16.1 -->

Then the householder Dasama, having assembled the Saṅgha from Vesālī and Pāṭaliputta, served and satisfied them with his own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods.

<!-- @segment mn52:16.2 -->

He clothed each and every mendicant in a pair of garments, with a set of three robes for Ānanda. And he had a dwelling worth five hundred built for Ānanda.
