---
slug: mn53
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: A Trainee
---

<!-- @segment mn53:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn53:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery.

<!-- @segment mn53:2.1 -->

Now at that time a new town hall had recently been constructed for the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu. It had not yet been occupied by an ascetic or brahmin or any human at all.

<!-- @segment mn53:2.2 -->

Then the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

<!-- @segment mn53:2.3 -->

“Sir, a new town hall has recently been constructed for the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu. It has not yet been occupied by an ascetic or brahmin or any human at all.

<!-- @segment mn53:2.4 -->

May the Buddha be the first to use it, and only then will the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu use it.

<!-- @segment mn53:2.5 -->

That would be for the lasting welfare and happiness of the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu.”

<!-- @segment mn53:3.1 -->

The Buddha consented with silence.

<!-- @segment mn53:3.2 -->

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, the Sakyans rose from their seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on their right. Then they went to the new town hall, where they spread carpets all over, prepared seats, set up a water jar, and placed an oil lamp. Then they went back to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn53:3.3 -->

bowed, stood to one side,

<!-- @segment mn53:3.4 -->

and told him of their preparations, saying,

<!-- @segment mn53:3.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn53:3.6 -->

“Please, sir, come at your convenience.”

<!-- @segment mn53:4.1 -->

Then the Buddha robed up and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the new town hall together with the Saṅgha of mendicants. Having washed his feet he entered the town hall and sat against the central column facing east.

<!-- @segment mn53:4.2 -->

The Saṅgha of mendicants also washed their feet, entered the town hall, and sat against the west wall facing east, with the Buddha right in front of them.

<!-- @segment mn53:4.3 -->

The Sakyans of Kapilavatthu also washed their feet, entered the town hall, and sat against the east wall facing west, with the Buddha right in front of them.

<!-- @segment mn53:5.1 -->

The Buddha spent much of the night educating, encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the Sakyans with a Dhamma talk. Then he addressed Venerable Ānanda,

<!-- @segment mn53:5.2 -->

“Ānanda, speak about the practicing trainee to the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu as you feel inspired.

<!-- @segment mn53:5.3 -->

My back is sore,

<!-- @segment mn53:5.4 -->

I’ll stretch it.”

<!-- @segment mn53:5.5 -->

“Yes, sir,” Ānanda replied.

<!-- @segment mn53:5.6 -->

And then the Buddha spread out his outer robe folded in four and laid down in the lion’s posture—on the right side, placing one foot on top of the other—mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up.

<!-- @segment mn53:6.1 -->

Then Ānanda addressed Mahānāma the Sakyan:

<!-- @segment mn53:6.2 -->

“Mahānāma, a noble disciple is accomplished in ethics, guards the sense doors, eats in moderation, and is dedicated to wakefulness. They have seven good qualities, and they get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty.

<!-- @segment mn53:7.1 -->

And how is a noble disciple accomplished in ethics?

<!-- @segment mn53:7.2 -->

It’s when a noble disciple is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken.

<!-- @segment mn53:7.3 -->

That’s how a noble disciple is ethical.

<!-- @segment mn53:8.1 -->

And how does a noble disciple guard the sense doors?

<!-- @segment mn53:8.2 -->

When a noble disciple sees a sight with their eyes, they don’t get caught up in the features and details.

<!-- @segment mn53:8.3 -->

If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint.

<!-- @segment mn53:8.4 -->

When they hear a sound with their ears …

<!-- @segment mn53:8.5 -->

When they smell an odor with their nose …

<!-- @segment mn53:8.6 -->

When they taste a flavor with their tongue …

<!-- @segment mn53:8.7 -->

When they feel a touch with their body …

<!-- @segment mn53:8.8 -->

When they know an idea with their mind, they don’t get caught up in the features and details.

<!-- @segment mn53:8.9 -->

If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint.

<!-- @segment mn53:8.10 -->

That’s how a noble disciple guards the sense doors.

<!-- @segment mn53:9.1 -->

And how does a noble disciple eat in moderation?

<!-- @segment mn53:9.2 -->

It’s when a noble disciple reflects rationally on the food that they eat:

<!-- @segment mn53:9.3 -->

‘Not for fun, indulgence, adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain this body, to avoid harm, and to support spiritual practice. In this way, I shall put an end to old discomfort and not give rise to new discomfort, and I will have the means to keep going, blamelessness, and a comfortable abiding.’

<!-- @segment mn53:9.4 -->

That’s how a noble disciple eats in moderation.

<!-- @segment mn53:10.1 -->

And how is a noble disciple dedicated to wakefulness?

<!-- @segment mn53:10.2 -->

It’s when a noble disciple practices walking and sitting meditation by day, purifying their mind from obstacles.

<!-- @segment mn53:10.3 -->

In the first watch of the night, they continue to practice walking and sitting meditation.

<!-- @segment mn53:10.4 -->

In the middle watch, they lie down in the lion’s posture—on the right side, placing one foot on top of the other—mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up.

<!-- @segment mn53:10.5 -->

In the last watch, they get up and continue to practice walking and sitting meditation, purifying their mind from obstacles.

<!-- @segment mn53:10.6 -->

That’s how a noble disciple is dedicated to wakefulness.

<!-- @segment mn53:11.1 -->

And how does a noble disciple have seven good qualities?

<!-- @segment mn53:11.2 -->

It’s when a noble disciple has faith in the Realized One’s awakening:

<!-- @segment mn53:11.3 -->

‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’

<!-- @segment mn53:12.1 -->

They have a conscience. They’re conscientious about bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and conscientious about having any bad, unskillful qualities.

<!-- @segment mn53:13.1 -->

They exercise prudence. They’re prudent when it comes to bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and prudent when it comes to acquiring any bad, unskillful qualities.

<!-- @segment mn53:14.1 -->

They’re very learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and penetrating them theoretically.

<!-- @segment mn53:15.1 -->

They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They’re strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities.

<!-- @segment mn53:16.1 -->

They’re mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long ago.

<!-- @segment mn53:17.1 -->

They’re wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering.

<!-- @segment mn53:17.2 -->

That’s how a noble disciple has seven good qualities.

<!-- @segment mn53:18.1 -->

And how does a noble disciple get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty?

<!-- @segment mn53:18.2 -->

It’s when a noble disciple, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption …

<!-- @segment mn53:18.3 -->

second absorption …

<!-- @segment mn53:18.4 -->

third absorption …

<!-- @segment mn53:18.5 -->

fourth absorption.

<!-- @segment mn53:18.6 -->

That’s how a noble disciple gets the four absorptions—blissful meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty.

<!-- @segment mn53:19.1 -->

When a noble disciple is accomplished in ethics, guards the sense doors, eats in moderation, and is dedicated to wakefulness; and they have seven good qualities, and they get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty, they are called a noble disciple who is a practicing trainee. Their eggs are unspoiled, and they are capable of breaking out of their shell, becoming awakened, and achieving the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.

<!-- @segment mn53:19.2 -->

Suppose there was a chicken with eight or ten or twelve eggs. And she properly sat on them to keep them warm and incubated. Even if that chicken doesn’t wish,

<!-- @segment mn53:19.3 -->

‘If only my chicks could break out of the eggshell with their claws and beak and hatch safely!’

<!-- @segment mn53:19.4 -->

Still they can break out and hatch safely.

<!-- @segment mn53:19.5 -->

In the same way, when a noble disciple is practicing all these things they are called a noble disciple who is a practicing trainee. Their eggs are unspoiled, and they are capable of breaking out of their shell, becoming awakened, and achieving the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.

<!-- @segment mn53:20.1 -->

Relying on this supreme purity of mindfulness and equanimity, that noble disciple recollects their many kinds of past lives.

<!-- @segment mn53:20.2 -->

That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. … And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details.

<!-- @segment mn53:20.3 -->

This is their first breaking out, like a chick from an eggshell.

<!-- @segment mn53:21.1 -->

Relying on this supreme purity of mindfulness and equanimity, that noble disciple, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. … They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds.

<!-- @segment mn53:21.2 -->

This is their second breaking out, like a chick from an eggshell.

<!-- @segment mn53:22.1 -->

Relying on this supreme purity of mindfulness and equanimity, that noble disciple realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.

<!-- @segment mn53:22.2 -->

This is their third breaking out, like a chick from an eggshell.

<!-- @segment mn53:23.1 -->

A noble disciple’s conduct includes the following: being accomplished in ethics,

<!-- @segment mn53:23.2 -->

guarding the sense doors,

<!-- @segment mn53:23.3 -->

moderation in eating,

<!-- @segment mn53:23.4 -->

being dedicated to wakefulness,

<!-- @segment mn53:23.5 -->

having seven good qualities,

<!-- @segment mn53:23.6 -->

and getting the four absorptions when they want, without trouble or difficulty.

<!-- @segment mn53:24.1 -->

A noble disciple’s knowledge includes the following: recollecting their past lives,

<!-- @segment mn53:24.2 -->

clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman,

<!-- @segment mn53:24.3 -->

and realizing the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life due to the ending of defilements.

<!-- @segment mn53:25.1 -->

This noble disciple is said to be ‘accomplished in knowledge’, and also ‘accomplished in conduct’, and also ‘accomplished in knowledge and conduct’.

<!-- @segment mn53:25.2 -->

And the divinity Sanaṅkumāra also spoke this verse:

<!-- @segment mn53:25.3 -->

‘The aristocrat is best among people

<!-- @segment mn53:25.4 -->

who take clan as the standard.

<!-- @segment mn53:25.5 -->

But one accomplished in knowledge and conduct

<!-- @segment mn53:25.6 -->

is best among gods and humans.’

<!-- @segment mn53:25.7 -->

And that verse was well sung by the Divinity Sanaṅkumāra, not poorly sung; well spoken, not poorly spoken, beneficial, not harmful, and it was approved by the Buddha.”

<!-- @segment mn53:26.1 -->

Then the Buddha got up and said to Venerable Ānanda,

<!-- @segment mn53:26.2 -->

“Good, good, Ānanda!

<!-- @segment mn53:26.3 -->

It’s good that you spoke to the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu about the practicing trainee.”

<!-- @segment mn53:26.4 -->

This is what Venerable Ānanda said,

<!-- @segment mn53:26.5 -->

and the teacher approved.

<!-- @segment mn53:26.6 -->

Satisfied, the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu approved what Venerable Ānanda said.
