---
slug: mn54
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Potaliya the Householder
---

<!-- @segment mn54:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn54:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Aṅguttarāpans, near the town of theirs named Āpaṇa.

<!-- @segment mn54:2.1 -->

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Āpaṇa for alms.

<!-- @segment mn54:2.2 -->

He wandered for alms in Āpaṇa. After the meal, on his return from almsround, he went to a certain forest grove for the day’s meditation.

<!-- @segment mn54:2.3 -->

Having plunged deep into it, he sat at the root of a certain tree to meditate.

<!-- @segment mn54:3.1 -->

Potaliya the householder also approached that forest grove while going for a walk. He was well dressed in sarong and cloak, with parasol and sandals. Having plunged deep into it, he went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment mn54:3.2 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he stood to one side, and the Buddha said to him,

<!-- @segment mn54:3.3 -->

“There are seats, householder. Please sit if you wish.”

<!-- @segment mn54:3.4 -->

When he said this, Potaliya was angry and upset. Thinking, “The ascetic Gotama addresses me as ‘householder’!” he stayed silent.

<!-- @segment mn54:3.5 -->

For a second time …

<!-- @segment mn54:3.6 -->

and a third time the Buddha said to him,

<!-- @segment mn54:3.7 -->

“There are seats, householder. Please sit if you wish.”

<!-- @segment mn54:3.8 -->

When he said this, Potaliya was angry and upset. Thinking, “The ascetic Gotama addresses me as ‘householder’!” he said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn54:3.9 -->

“Worthy Gotama, it is neither proper nor appropriate for you to address me as ‘householder’.”

<!-- @segment mn54:3.10 -->

“Well, householder, you have the features, attributes, and signs of a householder.”

<!-- @segment mn54:3.11 -->

“Mister Gotama, it’s because I have turned down all work and cut off all business.”

<!-- @segment mn54:3.12 -->

“Householder, in what way have you turned down all work and cut off all business?”

<!-- @segment mn54:3.13 -->

“Worthy Gotama, all the money, grain, gold, and silver I used to have has been handed over to my children as their inheritance. And in this matter I do not advise or reprimand them, but live with nothing more than food and clothes.

<!-- @segment mn54:3.14 -->

That’s how I have turned down all work and cut off all business.”

<!-- @segment mn54:3.15 -->

“The cutting off of business as you describe it is one thing, householder, but the cutting off of business in the training of the Noble One is quite different.”

<!-- @segment mn54:3.16 -->

“But what, sir, is cutting off of business in the training of the Noble One?

<!-- @segment mn54:3.17 -->

Sir, please teach me this.”

<!-- @segment mn54:3.18 -->

“Well then, householder, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment mn54:3.19 -->

“Yes, sir,” said Potaliya.

<!-- @segment mn54:4.1 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment mn54:4.2 -->

“Householder, these eight things lead to the cutting off of business in the training of the Noble One.

<!-- @segment mn54:4.3 -->

What eight?

<!-- @segment mn54:4.4 -->

Killing living creatures should be given up, relying on not killing living creatures.

<!-- @segment mn54:4.5 -->

Stealing should be given up, relying on not stealing.

<!-- @segment mn54:4.6 -->

Lying should be given up, relying on speaking the truth.

<!-- @segment mn54:4.7 -->

Backbiting should be given up, relying on not backbiting.

<!-- @segment mn54:4.8 -->

Greed and lust should be given up, relying on not being greedy and lustful.

<!-- @segment mn54:4.9 -->

Blaming and insulting should be given up, relying on not blaming and not insulting.

<!-- @segment mn54:4.10 -->

Anger and distress should be given up, relying on not being angry and distressed.

<!-- @segment mn54:4.11 -->

Arrogance should be given up, relying on not being arrogant.

<!-- @segment mn54:4.12 -->

These are the eight things—stated in brief without being analyzed in detail—that lead to the cutting off of business in the training of the Noble One.”

<!-- @segment mn54:5.1 -->

“Sir, please teach me these eight things in detail out of sympathy.”

<!-- @segment mn54:5.2 -->

“Well then, householder, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment mn54:5.3 -->

“Yes, sir,” said Potaliya.

<!-- @segment mn54:5.4 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment mn54:6.1 -->

“‘Killing living creatures should be given up, relying on not killing living creatures.’ That’s what I said, but why did I say it?

<!-- @segment mn54:6.2 -->

It’s when a noble disciple reflects:

<!-- @segment mn54:6.3 -->

‘I am practicing to give up and cut off the fetters that might cause me to kill living creatures.

<!-- @segment mn54:6.4 -->

But if I were to kill living creatures, because of that I would reprimand myself; sensible people, after examination, would criticize me; and when my body breaks up, after death, I could expect to be reborn in a bad place.

<!-- @segment mn54:6.5 -->

And killing living creatures is itself a fetter and a hindrance.

<!-- @segment mn54:6.6 -->

The distressing and feverish defilements that might arise because of killing living creatures do not occur in someone who does not kill living creatures.’

<!-- @segment mn54:6.7 -->

‘Killing living creatures should be given up, relying on not killing living creatures.’

<!-- @segment mn54:6.8 -->

That’s what I said, and this is why I said it.

<!-- @segment mn54:7.1 -->

‘Stealing …

<!-- @segment mn54:7.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:7.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:7.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:7.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:7.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:7.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:7.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:8.1 -->

lying …

<!-- @segment mn54:8.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:8.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:8.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:8.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:8.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:8.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:8.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:9.1 -->

backbiting …

<!-- @segment mn54:9.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:9.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:9.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:9.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:9.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:9.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:9.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:10.1 -->

greed and lust …

<!-- @segment mn54:10.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:10.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:10.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:10.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:10.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:10.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:10.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:11.1 -->

blaming and insulting …

<!-- @segment mn54:11.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:11.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:11.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:11.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:11.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:11.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:11.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:12.1 -->

anger and distress …

<!-- @segment mn54:12.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:12.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:12.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:12.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:12.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:12.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:12.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:13.1 -->

Arrogance should be given up, relying on not being arrogant.’ That’s what I said, but why did I say it?

<!-- @segment mn54:13.2 -->

It’s when a noble disciple reflects:

<!-- @segment mn54:13.3 -->

‘I am practicing to give up and cut off the fetters that might cause me to be arrogant.

<!-- @segment mn54:13.4 -->

But if I were to be arrogant, because of that I would reprimand myself; sensible people, after examination, would criticize me; and when my body breaks up, after death, I could expect to be reborn in a bad place.

<!-- @segment mn54:13.5 -->

And arrogance is itself a fetter and a hindrance.

<!-- @segment mn54:13.6 -->

The distressing and feverish defilements that might arise because of arrogance do not occur in someone who is not arrogant.’

<!-- @segment mn54:13.7 -->

‘Arrogance should be given up by not being arrogant.’

<!-- @segment mn54:13.8 -->

That’s what I said, and this is why I said it.

<!-- @segment mn54:14.1 -->

These are the eight things—stated in brief and analyzed in detail—that lead to the cutting off of business in the training of the Noble One.

<!-- @segment mn54:14.2 -->

But just this much does not constitute the cutting off of business in each and every respect in the training of the Noble One.”

<!-- @segment mn54:14.3 -->

“But, sir, how is there the cutting off of business in each and every respect in the training of the Noble One?

<!-- @segment mn54:14.4 -->

Sir, please teach me this.”

<!-- @segment mn54:14.5 -->

“Well then, householder, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment mn54:14.6 -->

“Yes, sir,” said Potaliya.

<!-- @segment mn54:14.7 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment mn54:15.0 -->

1. The Dangers of Sensual Pleasures

<!-- @segment mn54:15.1 -->

“Householder, suppose a dog weak with hunger was hanging around a butcher’s shop.

<!-- @segment mn54:15.2 -->

A deft butcher or their apprentice would toss them a skeleton scraped clean of flesh and smeared in blood.

<!-- @segment mn54:15.3 -->

What do you think, householder?

<!-- @segment mn54:15.4 -->

Gnawing on such a fleshless skeleton, would that dog still get rid of its hunger?”

<!-- @segment mn54:15.5 -->

“No, sir.

<!-- @segment mn54:15.6 -->

Why not?

<!-- @segment mn54:15.7 -->

Because that skeleton is scraped clean of flesh and smeared in blood.

<!-- @segment mn54:15.8 -->

That dog will eventually get weary and frustrated.”

<!-- @segment mn54:15.9 -->

“In the same way, a noble disciple reflects:

<!-- @segment mn54:15.10 -->

‘With the simile of a skeleton the Buddha said that sensual pleasures give little gratification and much suffering and distress, and they are all the more full of drawbacks.’

<!-- @segment mn54:15.11 -->

Having truly seen this with right understanding, they shun equanimity based on diversity and develop only the equanimity based on unity, where all kinds of grasping to the worldly pleasures of the flesh cease without remainder.

<!-- @segment mn54:16.1 -->

Suppose a vulture or a crow or a hawk was to grab a scrap of meat and fly away.

<!-- @segment mn54:16.2 -->

Other vultures, crows, and hawks would keep chasing it, pecking and clawing.

<!-- @segment mn54:16.3 -->

What do you think, householder?

<!-- @segment mn54:16.4 -->

If that vulture, crow, or hawk doesn’t quickly let go of that scrap of meat, wouldn’t that result in death or deadly suffering for them?”

<!-- @segment mn54:16.5 -->

“Yes, sir.” …

<!-- @segment mn54:16.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:16.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:16.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:17.1 -->

“Suppose a person carrying a blazing grass torch was to walk against the wind.

<!-- @segment mn54:17.2 -->

What do you think, householder?

<!-- @segment mn54:17.3 -->

If that person doesn’t quickly let go of that blazing grass torch, wouldn’t they burn their hands or arm or other major or minor limb, resulting in death or deadly suffering for them?”

<!-- @segment mn54:17.4 -->

“Yes, sir.” …

<!-- @segment mn54:17.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:17.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:17.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:18.1 -->

“Suppose there was a pit of glowing coals deeper than a man’s height, full of glowing coals that neither flamed nor smoked.

<!-- @segment mn54:18.2 -->

Then a person would come along who wants to live and doesn’t want to die, who wants to be happy and recoils from pain.

<!-- @segment mn54:18.3 -->

Two strong men would grab them by the arms and drag them towards the pit of glowing coals.

<!-- @segment mn54:18.4 -->

What do you think, householder?

<!-- @segment mn54:18.5 -->

Wouldn’t that person writhe and struggle to and fro?”

<!-- @segment mn54:18.6 -->

“Yes, sir.

<!-- @segment mn54:18.7 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment mn54:18.8 -->

For that person knows: ‘If I fall in that pit of glowing coals, that’d result in my death or deadly pain.’” …

<!-- @segment mn54:18.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:18.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:18.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:19.1 -->

“Suppose a person was to see delightful parks, woods, meadows, and lotus ponds in a dream.

<!-- @segment mn54:19.2 -->

But when they woke they couldn’t see them at all. …

<!-- @segment mn54:19.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:19.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:19.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:20.1 -->

Suppose a man had borrowed some goods—a gentleman’s carriage and fine jeweled earrings—

<!-- @segment mn54:20.2 -->

and preceded and surrounded by these he proceeded through the middle of Āpaṇa.

<!-- @segment mn54:20.3 -->

When people saw him they’d say:

<!-- @segment mn54:20.4 -->

‘This must be a wealthy man! For that’s how the wealthy enjoy their wealth.’

<!-- @segment mn54:20.5 -->

But when the owners saw him, they’d take back what was theirs.

<!-- @segment mn54:20.6 -->

What do you think? Would that be enough for that man to get upset?”

<!-- @segment mn54:20.7 -->

“Yes, sir.

<!-- @segment mn54:20.8 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment mn54:20.9 -->

Because the owners took back what was theirs.” …

<!-- @segment mn54:20.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:20.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:20.12 -->



<!-- @segment mn54:21.1 -->

“Suppose there was a dense forest grove not far from a town or village.

<!-- @segment mn54:21.2 -->

And there was a tree laden with fruit, yet none of the fruit had fallen to the ground.

<!-- @segment mn54:21.3 -->

And along came a person in need of fruit, wandering in search of fruit.

<!-- @segment mn54:21.4 -->

Having plunged deep into that forest grove, they’d see that tree laden with fruit.

<!-- @segment mn54:21.5 -->

They’d think:

<!-- @segment mn54:21.6 -->

‘That tree is laden with fruit, yet none of the fruit has fallen to the ground.

<!-- @segment mn54:21.7 -->

But I know how to climb a tree.

<!-- @segment mn54:21.8 -->

Why don’t I climb the tree, eat as much as I like, then fill my pouch?’

<!-- @segment mn54:21.9 -->

And that’s what they’d do.

<!-- @segment mn54:21.10 -->

And along would come a second person in need of fruit, wandering in search of fruit, carrying a sharp axe.

<!-- @segment mn54:21.11 -->

Having plunged deep into that forest grove, they’d see that tree laden with fruit.

<!-- @segment mn54:21.12 -->

They’d think:

<!-- @segment mn54:21.13 -->

‘That tree is laden with fruit, yet none of the fruit has fallen to the ground.

<!-- @segment mn54:21.14 -->

But I don’t know how to climb a tree.

<!-- @segment mn54:21.15 -->

Why don’t I chop this tree down at the root, eat as much as I like, then fill my pouch?’

<!-- @segment mn54:21.16 -->

And so they’d chop the tree down at the root.

<!-- @segment mn54:21.17 -->

What do you think, householder?

<!-- @segment mn54:21.18 -->

If the first person, who climbed the tree, doesn’t quickly come down, when that tree fell wouldn’t they break their hand or arm or other major or minor limb, resulting in death or deadly suffering for them?”

<!-- @segment mn54:21.19 -->

“Yes, sir.”

<!-- @segment mn54:21.20 -->

“In the same way, a noble disciple reflects:

<!-- @segment mn54:21.21 -->

‘With the simile of the fruit tree the Buddha said that sensual pleasures give little gratification and much suffering and distress, and they are all the more full of drawbacks.’

<!-- @segment mn54:21.22 -->

Having truly seen this with right understanding, they shun equanimity based on diversity and develop only the equanimity based on unity, where all kinds of grasping to the worldly pleasures of the flesh cease without remainder.

<!-- @segment mn54:22.1 -->

Relying on this supreme purity of mindfulness and equanimity, that noble disciple recollects their many kinds of past lives.

<!-- @segment mn54:22.2 -->

That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. … They recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details.

<!-- @segment mn54:23.1 -->

Relying on this supreme purity of mindfulness and equanimity, that noble disciple, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. … They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds.

<!-- @segment mn54:24.1 -->

Relying on this supreme purity of mindfulness and equanimity, that noble disciple realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.

<!-- @segment mn54:25.1 -->

That’s how there is the cutting off of business in each and every respect in the training of the Noble One.

<!-- @segment mn54:25.2 -->

What do you think, householder?

<!-- @segment mn54:25.3 -->

Do you regard yourself as having cut off business in a way comparable to the cutting off of business in each and every respect in the training of the Noble One?”

<!-- @segment mn54:25.4 -->

“Who am I compared to one who has cut off business in each and every respect in the training of the Noble One?

<!-- @segment mn54:25.5 -->

I am far from that.

<!-- @segment mn54:25.6 -->

Sir, I used to think that the wanderers following other religions were thoroughbreds, and I fed them and treated them accordingly, but they were not actually thoroughbreds.

<!-- @segment mn54:25.7 -->

I thought that the mendicants were not thoroughbreds, and I fed them and treated them accordingly, but they actually were thoroughbreds.

<!-- @segment mn54:25.8 -->

But now I shall understand that the wanderers following other religions are not actually thoroughbreds, and I will feed them and treat them accordingly.

<!-- @segment mn54:25.9 -->

And I shall understand that the mendicants actually are thoroughbreds, and I will feed them and treat them accordingly.

<!-- @segment mn54:25.10 -->

The Buddha has inspired me to have love, confidence, and respect for ascetics!

<!-- @segment mn54:26.1 -->

Excellent, sir! Excellent!

<!-- @segment mn54:26.2 -->

As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, the Buddha has made the teaching clear in many ways.

<!-- @segment mn54:26.3 -->

I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment mn54:26.4 -->

From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”
