---
slug: mn58
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Prince Abhaya
---

<!-- @segment mn58:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn58:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground.

<!-- @segment mn58:2.1 -->

Then Prince Abhaya went up to the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Jain Ñātika said to him,

<!-- @segment mn58:3.1 -->

“Come, prince, refute the ascetic Gotama’s doctrine.

<!-- @segment mn58:3.2 -->

Then you will get a good reputation:

<!-- @segment mn58:3.3 -->

‘Prince Abhaya refuted the doctrine of the ascetic Gotama, so mighty and powerful!’”

<!-- @segment mn58:3.4 -->

“But sir, how am I to do this?”

<!-- @segment mn58:3.5 -->

“Here, prince, go to the ascetic Gotama and say to him:

<!-- @segment mn58:3.6 -->

‘Sir, may the Realized One utter speech that is disliked by others?’

<!-- @segment mn58:3.7 -->

When he’s asked this, if he answers:

<!-- @segment mn58:3.8 -->

‘He may, prince,’ say this to him,

<!-- @segment mn58:3.9 -->

‘So what then, sir, is the difference between you and an ordinary person?

<!-- @segment mn58:3.10 -->

For even an ordinary person may utter speech that is disliked by others.’

<!-- @segment mn58:3.11 -->

But if he answers,

<!-- @segment mn58:3.12 -->

‘He may not, prince,’ say this to him:

<!-- @segment mn58:3.13 -->

‘So why then, sir, did you declare of Devadatta:

<!-- @segment mn58:3.14 -->

“Devadatta is going to a place of loss, to hell, there to remain for an eon, irredeemable”?

<!-- @segment mn58:3.15 -->

Devadatta was angry and upset with what you said.’

<!-- @segment mn58:3.16 -->

When you put this dilemma to him, the Buddha won’t be able to either spit it out or swallow it down.

<!-- @segment mn58:3.17 -->

He’ll be like a man with an iron cross stuck in his throat, unable to either spit it out or swallow it down.”

<!-- @segment mn58:3.18 -->



<!-- @segment mn58:4.1 -->

“Yes, sir,” replied Abhaya. He rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Jain Ñātika, keeping him on his right. Then he went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side.

<!-- @segment mn58:4.2 -->

Then he looked up at the sun and thought,

<!-- @segment mn58:4.3 -->

“It’s too late to refute the Buddha’s doctrine today.

<!-- @segment mn58:4.4 -->

I shall refute his doctrine in my own home tomorrow.” He said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn58:4.5 -->

“Sir, would the Buddha, together with three other monks, please accept tomorrow’s meal from me?”

<!-- @segment mn58:4.6 -->

The Buddha consented with silence.

<!-- @segment mn58:5.1 -->

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, Abhaya rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

<!-- @segment mn58:5.2 -->

Then when the night had passed, the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to Abhaya’s home, and sat down on the seat spread out.

<!-- @segment mn58:5.3 -->

Then Abhaya served and satisfied the Buddha with his own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods.

<!-- @segment mn58:5.4 -->

When the Buddha had eaten and washed his hand and bowl, Abhaya took a low seat, sat to one side,

<!-- @segment mn58:6.1 -->

and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn58:6.2 -->

“Sir, may the Realized One utter speech that is disliked by others?”

<!-- @segment mn58:6.3 -->

“This matter is not categorical, prince.”

<!-- @segment mn58:6.4 -->

“Then the Jains have lost in this, sir.”

<!-- @segment mn58:6.5 -->

“But prince, why do you say that

<!-- @segment mn58:6.6 -->

the Jains have lost in this?”

<!-- @segment mn58:6.7 -->

Then Abhaya told the Buddha all that had happened.

<!-- @segment mn58:6.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn58:6.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn58:6.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn58:6.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn58:6.12 -->



<!-- @segment mn58:6.13 -->



<!-- @segment mn58:6.14 -->



<!-- @segment mn58:6.15 -->



<!-- @segment mn58:6.16 -->



<!-- @segment mn58:6.17 -->



<!-- @segment mn58:6.18 -->



<!-- @segment mn58:6.19 -->



<!-- @segment mn58:6.20 -->



<!-- @segment mn58:6.21 -->



<!-- @segment mn58:6.22 -->



<!-- @segment mn58:6.23 -->



<!-- @segment mn58:6.24 -->



<!-- @segment mn58:6.25 -->



<!-- @segment mn58:6.26 -->



<!-- @segment mn58:7.1 -->

Now at that time a little baby boy was sitting in Prince Abhaya’s lap.

<!-- @segment mn58:7.2 -->

Then the Buddha said to Abhaya,

<!-- @segment mn58:7.3 -->

“What do you think, prince?

<!-- @segment mn58:7.4 -->

If—because of your negligence or his nursemaid’s negligence—your boy were to put a stick or stone in his mouth, what would you do to him?”

<!-- @segment mn58:7.5 -->

“I’d try to take it out, sir.

<!-- @segment mn58:7.6 -->

If that didn’t work, I’d cradle his head with my left hand and take it out using a hooked finger of my right hand, even if it drew blood.

<!-- @segment mn58:7.7 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment mn58:7.8 -->

Because I have sympathy for the boy, sir.”

<!-- @segment mn58:8.1 -->

“In the same way, prince, the Realized One does not utter speech that he knows to be untrue, false, and pointless, and which is disliked by others.

<!-- @segment mn58:8.2 -->

The Realized One does not utter speech that he knows to be true and correct, but which is harmful and disliked by others.

<!-- @segment mn58:8.3 -->

The Realized One knows the right time to speak so as to explain what he knows to be true, correct, and beneficial, but which is disliked by others.

<!-- @segment mn58:8.4 -->

The Realized One does not utter speech that he knows to be untrue, false, and pointless, but which is liked by others.

<!-- @segment mn58:8.5 -->

The Realized One does not utter speech that he knows to be true and correct, but which is harmful, even if it is liked by others.

<!-- @segment mn58:8.6 -->

The Realized One knows the right time to speak so as to explain what he knows to be true, correct, and beneficial, and which is liked by others.

<!-- @segment mn58:8.7 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment mn58:8.8 -->

Because the Realized One has sympathy for sentient beings.”

<!-- @segment mn58:9.1 -->

“Sir, there are clever aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or ascetics who come to see you with a question already planned.

<!-- @segment mn58:9.2 -->

Do you think beforehand that if they ask you like this, you’ll answer like that, or does the answer just strike you on the spot?”

<!-- @segment mn58:10.1 -->

“Well then, prince, I’ll ask you about this in return, and you can answer as you like.

<!-- @segment mn58:10.2 -->

What do you think, prince?

<!-- @segment mn58:10.3 -->

Are you skilled in the various parts of a chariot?”

<!-- @segment mn58:10.4 -->

“I am, sir.”

<!-- @segment mn58:10.5 -->

“What do you think, prince?

<!-- @segment mn58:10.6 -->

When they come to you and ask:

<!-- @segment mn58:10.7 -->

‘What’s the name of this chariot part?’

<!-- @segment mn58:10.8 -->

Do you think beforehand that if they ask you like this, you’ll answer like that, or does the answer appear to you on the spot?”

<!-- @segment mn58:10.9 -->

“Sir, I’m well-known as a charioteer skilled in a chariot’s parts.

<!-- @segment mn58:10.10 -->

All the major and minor parts are well-known to me.

<!-- @segment mn58:10.11 -->

The answer just appears to me on the spot.”

<!-- @segment mn58:11.1 -->

“In the same way, when clever aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or ascetics come to see me with a question already planned, the answer just strikes me on the spot.

<!-- @segment mn58:11.2 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment mn58:11.3 -->

Because the Realized One has clearly comprehended the principle of the teachings, so that the answer just strikes him on the spot.”

<!-- @segment mn58:12.1 -->

When he had spoken, Prince Abhaya said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn58:12.2 -->

“Excellent, sir! Excellent! …

<!-- @segment mn58:12.3 -->

From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”
