---
slug: mn73
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Longer Discourse With Vacchagotta
---

<!-- @segment mn73:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn73:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground.

<!-- @segment mn73:2.1 -->

Then the wanderer Vacchagotta went up to the Buddha and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment mn73:2.2 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn73:3.1 -->

“For a long time I have had discussions with the worthy Gotama.

<!-- @segment mn73:3.2 -->

Please teach me in brief what is skillful and what is unskillful.”

<!-- @segment mn73:3.3 -->

“Vaccha, I can teach you what is skillful and what is unskillful in brief or in detail.

<!-- @segment mn73:3.4 -->

Still, let me do so in brief.

<!-- @segment mn73:3.5 -->

Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment mn73:3.6 -->

“Yes, worthy sir,” Vaccha replied.

<!-- @segment mn73:3.7 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment mn73:4.1 -->

“Greed is unskillful, contentment is skillful.

<!-- @segment mn73:4.2 -->

Hate is unskillful, love is skillful.

<!-- @segment mn73:4.3 -->

Delusion is unskillful, understanding is skillful.

<!-- @segment mn73:4.4 -->

So there are these three unskillful things and three that are skillful.

<!-- @segment mn73:5.1 -->

Killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct; speech that’s false, backbiting, harsh, or nonsensical; covetousness, ill will, and wrong view: these things are unskillful.

<!-- @segment mn73:5.2 -->

Refraining from killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct; refraining from speech that’s false, backbiting, harsh, or nonsensical; contentment, kind-heartedness, and right view: these things are skillful.

<!-- @segment mn73:5.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:5.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:5.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:5.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:5.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:5.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:5.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:5.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:5.11 -->

So there are these ten unskillful things and ten that are skillful.

<!-- @segment mn73:6.1 -->

When a mendicant has given up craving so it is cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future, that mendicant is perfected. They’ve ended the defilements, completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their heart’s goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and are rightly freed through enlightenment.”

<!-- @segment mn73:7.1 -->

“Leaving aside the worthy Gotama,

<!-- @segment mn73:7.2 -->

is there even a single monk disciple of the worthy Gotama who has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and lives having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements?”

<!-- @segment mn73:7.3 -->

“There are not just one hundred such monks who are my disciples, Vaccha, or two or three or four or five hundred, but many more than that.”

<!-- @segment mn73:8.1 -->

“Leaving aside the worthy Gotama and the monks,

<!-- @segment mn73:8.2 -->

is there even a single nun disciple of the worthy Gotama who has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and lives having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements?”

<!-- @segment mn73:8.3 -->

“There are not just one hundred such nuns who are my disciples, Vaccha, or two or three or four or five hundred, but many more than that.”

<!-- @segment mn73:9.1 -->

“Leaving aside the worthy Gotama, the monks, and the nuns,

<!-- @segment mn73:9.2 -->

is there even a single layman disciple of Mister Gotama—white-clothed and chaste—who, with the ending of the five lower fetters, is reborn spontaneously, to be extinguished there, not liable to return from that world?”

<!-- @segment mn73:9.3 -->

“There are not just one hundred such chaste laymen who are my disciples, Vaccha, or two or three or four or five hundred, but many more than that.”

<!-- @segment mn73:10.1 -->

“Leaving aside Mister Gotama, the monks, the nuns, and the chaste laymen,

<!-- @segment mn73:10.2 -->

is there even a single layman disciple of the worthy Gotama—white-clothed, enjoying sensual pleasures, following instructions, and responding to advice—who has gone beyond doubt, got rid of indecision, and lives self-assured and independent of others regarding the Teacher’s instruction?”

<!-- @segment mn73:10.3 -->

“There are not just one hundred such laymen enjoying sensual pleasures who are my disciples, Vaccha, or two or three or four or five hundred, but many more than that.”

<!-- @segment mn73:11.1 -->

“Leaving aside Mister Gotama, the monks, the nuns, the chaste laymen, and the laymen enjoying sensual pleasures,

<!-- @segment mn73:11.2 -->

is there even a single laywoman disciple of Mister Gotama—white-clothed and chaste—who, with the ending of the five lower fetters, is reborn spontaneously, to be extinguished there, not liable to return from that world?”

<!-- @segment mn73:11.3 -->

“There are not just one hundred such chaste laywomen who are my disciples, Vaccha, or two or three or four or five hundred, but many more than that.”

<!-- @segment mn73:12.1 -->

“Leaving aside Mister Gotama, the monks, the nuns, the chaste laymen, the laymen enjoying sensual pleasures, and the chaste laywomen,

<!-- @segment mn73:12.2 -->

is there even a single laywoman disciple of the worthy Gotama—white-clothed, enjoying sensual pleasures, following instructions, and responding to advice—who has gone beyond doubt, got rid of indecision, and lives self-assured and independent of others regarding the Teacher’s instruction?”

<!-- @segment mn73:12.3 -->

“There are not just one hundred such laywomen enjoying sensual pleasures who are my disciples, Vaccha, or two or three or four or five hundred, but many more than that.”

<!-- @segment mn73:13.1 -->

“If the worthy Gotama was the only one to succeed in this teaching, not any monks,

<!-- @segment mn73:13.2 -->

then this spiritual path would be incomplete in that respect.

<!-- @segment mn73:13.3 -->

But because both the worthy Gotama and monks have succeeded in this teaching,

<!-- @segment mn73:13.4 -->

this spiritual path is complete in that respect.

<!-- @segment mn73:13.5 -->

If the worthy Gotama and the monks were the only ones to succeed in this teaching, not any nuns …

<!-- @segment mn73:13.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:13.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:13.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:13.9 -->

chaste laymen …

<!-- @segment mn73:13.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:13.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:13.12 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:13.13 -->

laymen enjoying sensual pleasures …

<!-- @segment mn73:13.14 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:13.15 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:13.16 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:13.17 -->

chaste laywomen …

<!-- @segment mn73:13.18 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:13.19 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:13.20 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:13.21 -->

laywomen enjoying sensual pleasures,

<!-- @segment mn73:13.22 -->

then this spiritual path would be incomplete in that respect.

<!-- @segment mn73:13.23 -->

But because Mister Gotama, monks, nuns, chaste laymen, laymen enjoying sensual pleasures, chaste laywomen, and laywomen enjoying sensual pleasures have all succeeded in this teaching,

<!-- @segment mn73:13.24 -->

this spiritual path is complete in that respect.

<!-- @segment mn73:14.1 -->

Just as the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines towards the ocean, and keeps pressing into the ocean, in the same way Mister Gotama’s assembly—with both laypeople and renunciates—slants, slopes, and inclines towards extinguishment, and keeps pressing upon extinguishment.

<!-- @segment mn73:15.1 -->

Excellent, worthy Gotama! …

<!-- @segment mn73:15.2 -->

I go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment mn73:15.3 -->

May I receive the going forth, the ordination in the worthy Gotama’s presence?”

<!-- @segment mn73:16.1 -->

“Vaccha, if someone formerly ordained in another sect wishes to take the going forth, the ordination in this teaching and training, they must spend four months on probation. When four months have passed, if the mendicants are satisfied, they’ll give the going forth, the ordination into monkhood.

<!-- @segment mn73:16.2 -->

However, I recognize individual differences in this matter.”

<!-- @segment mn73:16.3 -->

“Sir, if four months probation are required in such a case, I’ll spend four years on probation. When four years have passed, if the mendicants are satisfied, let them give me the going forth, the ordination into monkhood.”

<!-- @segment mn73:16.4 -->

And the wanderer Vaccha received the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha’s presence.

<!-- @segment mn73:17.1 -->

Not long after his ordination, a fortnight later, Venerable Vacchagotta went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn73:17.2 -->

“Sir, I’ve reached as far as possible with the knowledge and understanding of a trainee.

<!-- @segment mn73:17.3 -->

Please teach me further.”

<!-- @segment mn73:18.1 -->

“Well then, Vaccha, further develop two things: serenity and discernment.

<!-- @segment mn73:18.2 -->

When you have further developed these two things, they’ll lead to the penetration of many elements.

<!-- @segment mn73:19.1 -->

As far as you want, you will be capable of realizing these things, since each and every one is within range:

<!-- @segment mn73:19.2 -->

‘May I wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying myself and becoming one again; materializing and dematerializing; going unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with my hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful; controlling my body as far as the realm of divinity.’

<!-- @segment mn73:20.1 -->

Whenever you want, you will be capable of realizing these things, since each and every one is within range:

<!-- @segment mn73:20.2 -->

‘With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, may I hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.’

<!-- @segment mn73:21.1 -->

As far as you want, you will be capable of realizing these things, since each and every one is within range:

<!-- @segment mn73:21.2 -->

‘May I understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having encompassed them with my mind.

<!-- @segment mn73:21.3 -->

May I understand mind with greed as “mind with greed”,

<!-- @segment mn73:21.4 -->

and mind without greed as “mind without greed”;

<!-- @segment mn73:21.5 -->

mind with hate as “mind with hate”,

<!-- @segment mn73:21.6 -->

and mind without hate as “mind without hate”;

<!-- @segment mn73:21.7 -->

mind with delusion as “mind with delusion”,

<!-- @segment mn73:21.8 -->

and mind without delusion as “mind without delusion”;

<!-- @segment mn73:21.9 -->

constricted mind as “constricted mind”,

<!-- @segment mn73:21.10 -->

and scattered mind as “scattered mind”;

<!-- @segment mn73:21.11 -->

expansive mind as “expansive mind”,

<!-- @segment mn73:21.12 -->

and unexpansive mind as “unexpansive mind”;

<!-- @segment mn73:21.13 -->

mind that is not supreme as “mind that is not supreme”,

<!-- @segment mn73:21.14 -->

and mind that is supreme as “mind that is supreme”;

<!-- @segment mn73:21.15 -->

mind immersed in samādhi as “mind immersed in samādhi”,

<!-- @segment mn73:21.16 -->

and mind not immersed in samādhi as “mind not immersed in samādhi”;

<!-- @segment mn73:21.17 -->

freed mind as “freed mind”,

<!-- @segment mn73:21.18 -->

and unfreed mind as “unfreed mind”.’

<!-- @segment mn73:21.19 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:22.1 -->

As far as you want, you will be capable of realizing these things, since each and every one is within range:

<!-- @segment mn73:22.2 -->

‘May I recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. May I remember: “There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.” May I recollect my many past lives, with features and details.’

<!-- @segment mn73:22.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:23.1 -->

Whenever you want, you will be capable of realizing these things, since each and every one is within range:

<!-- @segment mn73:23.2 -->

‘With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place—and understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds: “These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.” And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. And may I understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds.’

<!-- @segment mn73:23.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:24.1 -->

As far as you want, you will be capable of realizing these things, since each and every one is within range:

<!-- @segment mn73:24.2 -->

‘May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my own insight due to the ending of defilements.’”

<!-- @segment mn73:24.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:25.1 -->

And then Venerable Vacchagotta approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. He rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

<!-- @segment mn73:26.1 -->

Then Vacchagotta, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment mn73:26.2 -->

He understood: “Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further for this place.”

<!-- @segment mn73:26.3 -->

And Venerable Vacchagotta became one of the perfected.

<!-- @segment mn73:27.1 -->

Now at that time several mendicants were going to see the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn73:27.2 -->

Vacchagotta saw them coming off in the distance,

<!-- @segment mn73:27.3 -->

went up to them, and said,

<!-- @segment mn73:27.4 -->

“Hello venerables, where are you going?”

<!-- @segment mn73:27.5 -->

“Reverend, we are going to see the Buddha.”

<!-- @segment mn73:27.6 -->

“Well then, reverends, in my name please bow with your head at the Buddha’s feet and say:

<!-- @segment mn73:27.7 -->

‘Sir, the mendicant Vacchagotta bows with his head to your feet and says,

<!-- @segment mn73:27.8 -->

“I have served the Blessed One! I have served the Holy One!”’”

<!-- @segment mn73:28.1 -->

“Yes, reverend,” they replied.

<!-- @segment mn73:28.2 -->

Then those mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn73:28.3 -->

“Sir, the mendicant Vacchagotta bows with his head to your feet and says:

<!-- @segment mn73:28.4 -->

‘I have served the Blessed One! I have served the Holy One!’”

<!-- @segment mn73:28.5 -->

“I’ve already encompassed Vacchagotta’s mind and understood that

<!-- @segment mn73:28.6 -->

he has the three knowledges, and is very mighty and powerful.

<!-- @segment mn73:28.7 -->

And deities also told me about this.”

<!-- @segment mn73:28.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn73:28.9 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn73:28.10 -->

Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said.
