---
slug: mn77
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Longer Discourse with Sakuludāyī
---

<!-- @segment mn77:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn77:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground.

<!-- @segment mn77:2.1 -->

Now at that time several very well-known wanderers were residing in the monastery of the wanderers in the peacocks’ feeding ground.

<!-- @segment mn77:2.2 -->

They included Annabhāra, Varadhara, Sakuludāyī, and other very well-known wanderers.

<!-- @segment mn77:3.1 -->

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Rājagaha for alms.

<!-- @segment mn77:3.2 -->

Then it occurred to him,

<!-- @segment mn77:3.3 -->

“It’s too early to wander for alms in Rājagaha.

<!-- @segment mn77:3.4 -->

Why don’t I visit the wanderer Sakuludāyī at the monastery of the wanderers in the peacocks’ feeding ground?”

<!-- @segment mn77:4.1 -->

So the Buddha went to the monastery of the wanderers.

<!-- @segment mn77:4.2 -->

Now at that time, Sakuludāyī was sitting together with a large assembly of wanderers making an uproar, a colossal racket. They engaged in all kinds of low talk, such as

<!-- @segment mn77:4.3 -->

talk about kings, bandits, and chief ministers; talk about armies, threats, and wars; talk about food, drink, clothes, and beds; talk about garlands and fragrances; talk about family, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about women and heroes; street talk and well talk; talk about the departed; motley talk; tales of land and sea; and talk about being reborn in this or that state of existence.

<!-- @segment mn77:4.4 -->

Sakuludāyī saw the Buddha coming off in the distance,

<!-- @segment mn77:4.5 -->

and hushed his own assembly,

<!-- @segment mn77:4.6 -->

“Be quiet, good fellows, don’t make a sound.

<!-- @segment mn77:4.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn77:4.8 -->

Here comes the ascetic Gotama.

<!-- @segment mn77:4.9 -->

The venerable likes quiet and praises quiet.

<!-- @segment mn77:4.10 -->

Hopefully if he sees that our assembly is quiet he’ll see fit to approach.”

<!-- @segment mn77:4.11 -->

Then those wanderers fell silent.

<!-- @segment mn77:5.1 -->

Then the Buddha approached Sakuludāyī,

<!-- @segment mn77:5.2 -->

who said to him,

<!-- @segment mn77:5.3 -->

“Let the Blessed One come, sir!

<!-- @segment mn77:5.4 -->

Welcome to the Blessed One, sir!

<!-- @segment mn77:5.5 -->

It’s been a long time since you took the opportunity to come here.

<!-- @segment mn77:5.6 -->

Please, sir, sit down, this seat is ready.”

<!-- @segment mn77:5.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn77:5.8 -->

The Buddha sat on the seat spread out,

<!-- @segment mn77:5.9 -->

while Sakuludāyī took a low seat and sat to one side.

<!-- @segment mn77:5.10 -->

The Buddha said to him,

<!-- @segment mn77:5.11 -->

“Udāyī, what were you sitting talking about just now? What conversation was left unfinished?”

<!-- @segment mn77:6.1 -->

“Sir, leave aside what we were sitting talking about just now.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.2 -->

It won’t be hard for you to hear about that later.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.3 -->

Sir, a few days ago several ascetics and brahmins who follow various other religions were sitting together at the debating hall, and this discussion came up among them:

<!-- @segment mn77:6.4 -->

‘The people of Aṅga and Magadha are so fortunate, so very fortunate!

<!-- @segment mn77:6.5 -->

For there are these ascetics and brahmins who lead an order and a community, and tutor a community. They’re well-known and famous religious founders, deemed holy by many people. And they have come down for the rainy season residence at Rājagaha.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.6 -->

They include Pūraṇa Kassapa,

<!-- @segment mn77:6.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn77:6.8 -->

the bamboo-staffed ascetic Gosāla,

<!-- @segment mn77:6.9 -->

Ajita of the hair blanket,

<!-- @segment mn77:6.10 -->

Pakudha Kaccāyana,

<!-- @segment mn77:6.11 -->

Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta,

<!-- @segment mn77:6.12 -->

and the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.13 -->



<!-- @segment mn77:6.14 -->

This ascetic Gotama also leads an order and a community, and tutors a community. He’s a well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy by many people.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.15 -->

And he too has come down for the rains residence at Rājagaha.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.16 -->

Which of these ascetics and brahmins is honored, respected, revered, and venerated by their disciples? And how do their disciples, honoring and respecting them, remain loyal?’

<!-- @segment mn77:6.17 -->

Some of them said:

<!-- @segment mn77:6.18 -->

‘This Pūraṇa Kassapa leads an order and a community, and tutors a community. He’s a well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy by many people.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.19 -->

But he’s not honored, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples. And his disciples, not honoring and respecting him, don’t remain loyal to him.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.20 -->

Once it so happened that he was teaching an assembly of many hundreds.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.21 -->

Then one of his disciples made a noise,

<!-- @segment mn77:6.22 -->

“My good fellows, don’t ask Pūraṇa Kassapa about that.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.23 -->

He doesn’t know that.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.24 -->

I know it. Ask me about it,

<!-- @segment mn77:6.25 -->

and I’ll answer you.”

<!-- @segment mn77:6.26 -->

Once it so happened that Pūraṇa Kassapa didn’t get his way, though he called out with raised arms,

<!-- @segment mn77:6.27 -->

“Be quiet, good fellows, don’t make a sound.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.28 -->

They’re not asking you, they’re asking me!

<!-- @segment mn77:6.29 -->

I’ll answer you!”

<!-- @segment mn77:6.30 -->

Indeed, many of his disciples have left him after refuting his doctrine:

<!-- @segment mn77:6.31 -->

“You don’t understand this teaching and training. I understand this teaching and training. What, you understand this teaching and training? You’re practicing wrong. I’m practicing right. I stay on topic, you don’t. You said last what you should have said first. You said first what you should have said last. What you’ve thought so much about has been disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You’re trapped; get yourself out of this—if you can!”

<!-- @segment mn77:6.32 -->

That’s how Pūraṇa Kassapa is not honored, respected, revered, venerated, and esteemed by his disciples. On the contrary, his disciples, not honoring and respecting him, don’t remain loyal to him.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.33 -->

Rather, he’s reviled, and rightly so.’

<!-- @segment mn77:6.34 -->

Others said:

<!-- @segment mn77:6.35 -->

’this bamboo-staffed ascetic Gosāla …

<!-- @segment mn77:6.36 -->

Ajita of the hair blanket …

<!-- @segment mn77:6.37 -->

Pakudha Kaccāyana …

<!-- @segment mn77:6.38 -->

Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta …

<!-- @segment mn77:6.39 -->

The Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan leads an order and a community, and tutors a community. He’s a well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy by many people.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.40 -->

But he’s not honored, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples. And his disciples, not honoring and respecting him, don’t remain loyal to him.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.41 -->

Once it so happened that he was teaching an assembly of many hundreds.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.42 -->

Then one of his disciples made a noise,

<!-- @segment mn77:6.43 -->

“My good fellows, don’t ask the Jain Ñātika about that.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.44 -->

He doesn’t know that.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.45 -->

I know it. Ask me about it,

<!-- @segment mn77:6.46 -->

and I’ll answer you.”

<!-- @segment mn77:6.47 -->

Once it so happened that the Jain Ñātika didn’t get his way, though he called out with raised arms,

<!-- @segment mn77:6.48 -->

“Be quiet, good fellows, don’t make a sound.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.49 -->

They’re not asking you, they’re asking me!

<!-- @segment mn77:6.50 -->

I’ll answer you!”

<!-- @segment mn77:6.51 -->

Indeed, many of his disciples have left him after refuting his doctrine:

<!-- @segment mn77:6.52 -->

“You don’t understand this teaching and training. I understand this teaching and training. What, you understand this teaching and training? You’re practicing wrong. I’m practicing right. I stay on topic, you don’t. You said last what you should have said first. You said first what you should have said last. What you’ve thought so much about has been disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You’re trapped; get yourself out of this—if you can!”

<!-- @segment mn77:6.53 -->

That’s how the Jain Ñātika is not honored, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples. On the contrary, his disciples, not honoring and respecting him, don’t remain loyal to him.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.54 -->

Rather, he’s reviled, and rightly so.’

<!-- @segment mn77:6.55 -->

Others said:

<!-- @segment mn77:6.56 -->

‘This ascetic Gotama leads an order and a community, and tutors a community. He’s a well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy by many people.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.57 -->

He’s honored, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples. And his disciples, honoring and respecting him, remain loyal to him.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.58 -->

Once it so happened that he was teaching an assembly of many hundreds.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.59 -->

Then one of his disciples cleared their throat.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.60 -->

And one of their spiritual companions nudged them with their knee, to indicate,

<!-- @segment mn77:6.61 -->

“Hush, venerable, don’t make sound! Our teacher, the Blessed One, is teaching!”

<!-- @segment mn77:6.62 -->

While the ascetic Gotama is teaching an assembly of many hundreds, there is no sound of his disciples coughing or clearing their throats.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.63 -->

That large crowd is poised expectantly at the ready, thinking,

<!-- @segment mn77:6.64 -->

“Whatever the Buddha teaches, we shall listen to it.”

<!-- @segment mn77:6.65 -->

It’s like when there’s a person at the crossroads pressing out pure dwarf-bee honey,

<!-- @segment mn77:6.66 -->

and a large crowd is poised expectantly at the ready.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.67 -->

In the same way, while the ascetic Gotama is teaching an assembly of many hundreds, there is no sound of his disciples coughing or clearing their throats.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.68 -->

That large crowd is poised expectantly at the ready, thinking,

<!-- @segment mn77:6.69 -->

“Whatever the Buddha teaches, we shall listen to it.”

<!-- @segment mn77:6.70 -->

Even when disciples of the ascetic Gotama, having clashed with their spiritual companions, disavow the training and return to a lesser life, they speak only praise of the teacher, the teaching, and the Saṅgha. They blame only themselves, not others: “We were unlucky, we had little merit. For even after going forth in such a well explained teaching and training we weren’t able to practice for life the perfectly full and pure spiritual life.”

<!-- @segment mn77:6.71 -->

They become monastery workers or lay followers, and they proceed having undertaken the five precepts.

<!-- @segment mn77:6.72 -->

That’s how the ascetic Gotama is honored, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples. And that’s how his disciples, honoring and respecting him, remain loyal to him.’”

<!-- @segment mn77:7.1 -->

“But Udāyī, how many qualities do you see in me, because of which my disciples honor, respect, revere, and venerate me; and honoring and respecting me, they remain loyal to me?”

<!-- @segment mn77:8.1 -->

“Sir, I see five such qualities in the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn77:8.2 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment mn77:8.3 -->

The Buddha eats little and praises eating little.

<!-- @segment mn77:8.4 -->

This is the first such quality I see in the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn77:8.5 -->

Furthermore, the Buddha is content with any kind of robe, and praises such contentment.

<!-- @segment mn77:8.6 -->

This is the second such quality I see in the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn77:8.7 -->

Furthermore, the Buddha is content with any kind of almsfood, and praises such contentment.

<!-- @segment mn77:8.8 -->

This is the third such quality I see in the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn77:8.9 -->

Furthermore, the Buddha is content with any kind of lodging, and praises such contentment.

<!-- @segment mn77:8.10 -->

This is the fourth such quality I see in the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn77:8.11 -->

Furthermore, the Buddha is secluded, and praises seclusion.

<!-- @segment mn77:8.12 -->

This is the fifth such quality I see in the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn77:8.13 -->

These are the five qualities I see in the Buddha, because of which his disciples honor, respect, revere, and venerate him; and honoring and respecting him, they remain loyal to him.”

<!-- @segment mn77:9.1 -->

“Suppose, Udāyī, my disciples were loyal to me because I eat little. Well, there are disciples of mine who eat a tumbler of food, or half a tumbler; they eat a wood-apple, or half a wood-apple.

<!-- @segment mn77:9.2 -->

But sometimes I even eat this bowl full to the brim, or even more.

<!-- @segment mn77:9.3 -->

So if it were the case that my disciples are loyal to me because I eat little, then those disciples who eat even less would not be loyal to me.

<!-- @segment mn77:9.4 -->

Suppose my disciples were loyal to me because I’m content with any kind of robe. Well, there are disciples of mine who have rag robes, wearing shabby robes. They gather scraps from charnel grounds, rubbish dumps, and shops, make them into a patchwork robe and wear it.

<!-- @segment mn77:9.5 -->

But sometimes I wear robes offered by householders that are strong, yet next to which bottle-gourd down is coarse.

<!-- @segment mn77:9.6 -->

So if it were the case that my disciples are loyal to me because I’m content with any kind of robe, then those disciples who wear rag robes would not be loyal to me.

<!-- @segment mn77:9.7 -->

Suppose my disciples were loyal to me because I’m content with any kind of almsfood. Well, there are disciples of mine who eat only almsfood, wander indiscriminately for almsfood, happy to eat whatever they glean. When they’ve entered an inhabited area, they don’t consent when invited to sit down.

<!-- @segment mn77:9.8 -->

But sometimes I even eat by invitation boiled fine rice with the dark grains picked out, served with many soups and sauces.

<!-- @segment mn77:9.9 -->

So if it were the case that my disciples are loyal to me because I’m content with any kind of almsfood, then those disciples who eat only almsfood would not be loyal to me.

<!-- @segment mn77:9.10 -->

Suppose my disciples were loyal to me because I’m content with any kind of lodging. Well, there are disciples of mine who stay at the root of a tree, in the open air. For eight months they don’t go under a roof.

<!-- @segment mn77:9.11 -->

But sometimes I even stay in bungalows, plastered inside and out, draft-free, with doors fastened and windows shuttered.

<!-- @segment mn77:9.12 -->

So if it were the case that my disciples are loyal to me because I’m content with any kind of lodging, then those disciples who stay at the root of a tree would not be loyal to me.

<!-- @segment mn77:9.13 -->

Suppose my disciples were loyal to me because I’m secluded and I praise seclusion. Well, there are disciples of mine who live in the wilderness, in remote lodgings. Having ventured deep into remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest, they live there, coming down to the midst of the Saṅgha each fortnight for the recitation of the monastic code.

<!-- @segment mn77:9.14 -->

But sometimes I live crowded by monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen; by rulers and their chief ministers, and monastics of other religions and their disciples.

<!-- @segment mn77:9.15 -->

So if it were the case that my disciples are loyal to me because I’m secluded and praise seclusion, then those disciples who live in the wilderness would not be loyal to me.

<!-- @segment mn77:9.16 -->

So, Udāyī, it’s not because of these five qualities that my disciples honor, respect, revere, and venerate me; and honoring and respecting me, they remain loyal to me.

<!-- @segment mn77:10.1 -->

There are five other qualities because of which my disciples honor, respect, revere, and venerate me; and honoring and respecting me, they remain loyal to me.

<!-- @segment mn77:10.2 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment mn77:10.3 -->

Firstly, my disciples esteem me for the higher ethics:

<!-- @segment mn77:10.4 -->

‘The ascetic Gotama is ethical. He possesses the entire spectrum of ethical conduct to the highest degree.’

<!-- @segment mn77:11.1 -->

Since this is so,

<!-- @segment mn77:11.2 -->

this is the first quality because of which my disciples are loyal to me.

<!-- @segment mn77:12.1 -->

Furthermore, my disciples esteem me for my excellent knowledge and vision:

<!-- @segment mn77:12.2 -->

‘The ascetic Gotama only claims to know when he does in fact know.

<!-- @segment mn77:12.3 -->

He only claims to see when he really does see.

<!-- @segment mn77:12.4 -->

He teaches based on direct knowledge, not without direct knowledge.

<!-- @segment mn77:12.5 -->

He teaches based on reason, not without reason.

<!-- @segment mn77:12.6 -->

He teaches with a demonstrable basis, not without it.’

<!-- @segment mn77:12.7 -->

Since this is so,

<!-- @segment mn77:12.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn77:12.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn77:12.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn77:12.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn77:12.12 -->

this is the second quality because of which my disciples are loyal to me.

<!-- @segment mn77:13.1 -->

Furthermore, my disciples esteem me for my higher wisdom:

<!-- @segment mn77:13.2 -->

‘The ascetic Gotama is wise. He possesses the entire spectrum of wisdom to the highest degree.

<!-- @segment mn77:13.3 -->

It’s not possible that he would fail to foresee grounds for future criticism, or to legitimately and completely refute the doctrines of others that come up.’

<!-- @segment mn77:13.4 -->

What do you think, Udāyī?

<!-- @segment mn77:13.5 -->

Would my disciples, knowing and seeing this, break in and interrupt me?”

<!-- @segment mn77:13.6 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment mn77:13.7 -->

“That’s because I don’t expect to be instructed by my disciples.

<!-- @segment mn77:13.8 -->

Invariably, my disciples expect instruction from me.

<!-- @segment mn77:13.9 -->

Since this is so,

<!-- @segment mn77:13.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn77:13.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn77:13.12 -->



<!-- @segment mn77:13.13 -->

this is the third quality because of which my disciples are loyal to me.

<!-- @segment mn77:14.1 -->

Furthermore, my disciples come to me and ask how the noble truth of suffering applies to the suffering in which they are swamped and mired. And I provide them with a satisfying answer to their question.

<!-- @segment mn77:14.2 -->

They ask how the noble truths of the origin of suffering,

<!-- @segment mn77:14.3 -->

the cessation of suffering,

<!-- @segment mn77:14.4 -->

and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering apply to the suffering in which they are swamped and mired. And I provide them with satisfying answers to their questions.

<!-- @segment mn77:14.5 -->

Since this is so,

<!-- @segment mn77:14.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn77:14.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn77:14.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn77:14.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn77:14.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn77:14.11 -->

this is the fourth quality because of which my disciples are loyal to me.

<!-- @segment mn77:15.1 -->

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.

<!-- @segment mn77:15.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment mn77:15.3 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings …

<!-- @segment mn77:15.4 -->

mind …

<!-- @segment mn77:15.5 -->

principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment mn77:15.6 -->

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight.

<!-- @segment mn77:16.1 -->

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the four right efforts.

<!-- @segment mn77:16.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise.

<!-- @segment mn77:16.3 -->

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up.

<!-- @segment mn77:16.4 -->

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise.

<!-- @segment mn77:16.5 -->

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fulfilled by development.

<!-- @segment mn77:16.6 -->

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight.

<!-- @segment mn77:17.1 -->

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the four bases of psychic power.

<!-- @segment mn77:17.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort.

<!-- @segment mn77:17.3 -->

They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy, and active effort.

<!-- @segment mn77:17.4 -->

They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and active effort.

<!-- @segment mn77:17.5 -->

They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry, and active effort.

<!-- @segment mn77:17.6 -->

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight.

<!-- @segment mn77:18.1 -->

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the five faculties.

<!-- @segment mn77:18.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant develops the faculties of faith,

<!-- @segment mn77:18.3 -->

energy,

<!-- @segment mn77:18.4 -->

mindfulness,

<!-- @segment mn77:18.5 -->

immersion,

<!-- @segment mn77:18.6 -->

and wisdom, which lead to peace and awakening.

<!-- @segment mn77:18.7 -->

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight.

<!-- @segment mn77:19.1 -->

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the five powers.

<!-- @segment mn77:19.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant develops the powers of faith,

<!-- @segment mn77:19.3 -->

energy,

<!-- @segment mn77:19.4 -->

mindfulness,

<!-- @segment mn77:19.5 -->

immersion,

<!-- @segment mn77:19.6 -->

and wisdom, which lead to peace and awakening.

<!-- @segment mn77:19.7 -->

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight.

<!-- @segment mn77:20.1 -->

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the seven awakening factors.

<!-- @segment mn77:20.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant develops the awakening factors of mindfulness,

<!-- @segment mn77:20.3 -->

investigation of principles,

<!-- @segment mn77:20.4 -->

energy,

<!-- @segment mn77:20.5 -->

rapture,

<!-- @segment mn77:20.6 -->

tranquility,

<!-- @segment mn77:20.7 -->

immersion,

<!-- @segment mn77:20.8 -->

and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.

<!-- @segment mn77:20.9 -->

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight.

<!-- @segment mn77:21.1 -->

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the noble eightfold path.

<!-- @segment mn77:21.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant develops right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

<!-- @segment mn77:21.3 -->

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight.

<!-- @segment mn77:22.1 -->

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the eight liberations.

<!-- @segment mn77:22.2 -->

Having physical form, they see forms.

<!-- @segment mn77:22.3 -->

This is the first liberation.

<!-- @segment mn77:22.4 -->

Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally.

<!-- @segment mn77:22.5 -->

This is the second liberation.

<!-- @segment mn77:22.6 -->

They’re focused only on beauty.

<!-- @segment mn77:22.7 -->

This is the third liberation.

<!-- @segment mn77:22.8 -->

Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite space.

<!-- @segment mn77:22.9 -->

This is the fourth liberation.

<!-- @segment mn77:22.10 -->

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness.

<!-- @segment mn77:22.11 -->

This is the fifth liberation.

<!-- @segment mn77:22.12 -->

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, they enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness.

<!-- @segment mn77:22.13 -->

This is the sixth liberation.

<!-- @segment mn77:22.14 -->

Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception.

<!-- @segment mn77:22.15 -->

This is the seventh liberation.

<!-- @segment mn77:22.16 -->

Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and feeling.

<!-- @segment mn77:22.17 -->

This is the eighth liberation.

<!-- @segment mn77:22.18 -->

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.1 -->

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the eight dimensions of mastery.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.2 -->

Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limited, both pretty and ugly.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.3 -->

Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’

<!-- @segment mn77:23.4 -->

This is the first dimension of mastery.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.5 -->

Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limitless, both pretty and ugly.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.6 -->

Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’

<!-- @segment mn77:23.7 -->

This is the second dimension of mastery.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.8 -->

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limited, both pretty and ugly.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.9 -->

Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’

<!-- @segment mn77:23.10 -->

This is the third dimension of mastery.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.11 -->

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limitless, both pretty and ugly.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.12 -->

Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’

<!-- @segment mn77:23.13 -->

This is the fourth dimension of mastery.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.14 -->

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, blue, with blue color and blue appearance.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.15 -->

They’re like a flax flower that’s blue, with blue color and blue appearance. Or a cloth from Varanasi that’s smoothed on both sides, blue, with blue color and blue appearance.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.16 -->

In the same way, not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, blue, with blue color and blue appearance.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.17 -->

Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’

<!-- @segment mn77:23.18 -->

This is the fifth dimension of mastery.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.19 -->

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.20 -->

They’re like a champak flower that’s yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. Or a cloth from Varanasi that’s smoothed on both sides, yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.21 -->

In the same way, not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.22 -->

Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’

<!-- @segment mn77:23.23 -->

This is the sixth dimension of mastery.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.24 -->

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are red, with red color and red appearance.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.25 -->

They’re like a scarlet mallow flower that’s red, with red color and red appearance. Or a cloth from Varanasi that’s smoothed on both sides, red, with red color and red appearance.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.26 -->

In the same way, not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are red, with red color and red appearance.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.27 -->

Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’

<!-- @segment mn77:23.28 -->

This is the seventh dimension of mastery.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.29 -->

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are white, with white color and white appearance.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.30 -->

They’re like the morning star that’s white, with white color and white appearance. Or a cloth from Varanasi that’s smoothed on both sides, white, with white color and white appearance.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.31 -->

In the same way, not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are white, with white color and white appearance.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.32 -->

Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’

<!-- @segment mn77:23.33 -->

This is the eighth dimension of mastery.

<!-- @segment mn77:23.34 -->

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight.

<!-- @segment mn77:24.1 -->

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the ten universal dimensions of meditation.

<!-- @segment mn77:24.2 -->

Someone perceives the meditation on universal earth above, below, across, undivided and limitless.

<!-- @segment mn77:24.3 -->

They perceive the meditation on universal water …

<!-- @segment mn77:24.4 -->

the meditation on universal fire …

<!-- @segment mn77:24.5 -->

the meditation on universal air …

<!-- @segment mn77:24.6 -->

the meditation on universal blue …

<!-- @segment mn77:24.7 -->

the meditation on universal yellow …

<!-- @segment mn77:24.8 -->

the meditation on universal red …

<!-- @segment mn77:24.9 -->

the meditation on universal white …

<!-- @segment mn77:24.10 -->

the meditation on universal space …

<!-- @segment mn77:24.11 -->

the meditation on universal consciousness above, below, across, undivided and limitless.

<!-- @segment mn77:24.12 -->

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight.

<!-- @segment mn77:25.1 -->

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the four absorptions.

<!-- @segment mn77:25.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment mn77:25.3 -->

They drench, steep, fill, and spread their body with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of seclusion.

<!-- @segment mn77:25.4 -->

It’s like when a deft bathroom attendant or their apprentice pours bath powder into a bronze dish, sprinkling it little by little with water. They knead it until the ball of bath powder is soaked and saturated with moisture, spread through inside and out; yet no moisture oozes out.

<!-- @segment mn77:25.5 -->

In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads their body with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of seclusion.

<!-- @segment mn77:26.1 -->

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption. It has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment mn77:26.2 -->

They drench, steep, fill, and spread their body with rapture and bliss born of immersion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of immersion.

<!-- @segment mn77:26.3 -->

It’s like a deep lake fed by spring water. There’s no inlet to the east, west, north, or south, and the heavens would not properly bestow showers from time to time.

<!-- @segment mn77:26.4 -->

But the stream of cool water welling up in the lake drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads throughout the lake. There’s no part of the lake that’s not spread through with cool water.

<!-- @segment mn77:26.5 -->

In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads their body with rapture and bliss born of immersion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of immersion.

<!-- @segment mn77:27.1 -->

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and remains in the third absorption. They meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’

<!-- @segment mn77:27.2 -->

They drench, steep, fill, and spread their body with bliss free of rapture. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with bliss free of rapture.

<!-- @segment mn77:27.3 -->

It’s like a pool with blue water lilies, or pink or white lotuses. Some of them sprout and grow in the water without rising above it, thriving underwater. From the tip to the root they’re drenched, steeped, filled, and soaked with cool water. There’s no part of them that’s not soaked with cool water.

<!-- @segment mn77:27.4 -->

In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads their body with bliss free of rapture. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with bliss free of rapture.

<!-- @segment mn77:28.1 -->

Furthermore, with the giving up of pleasure and pain and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption. It is without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

<!-- @segment mn77:28.2 -->

They sit spreading their body through with pure bright mind. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with pure bright mind.

<!-- @segment mn77:28.3 -->

It’s like someone sitting wrapped from head to foot with white cloth. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread over with white cloth.

<!-- @segment mn77:28.4 -->

In the same way, they sit spreading their body through with pure bright mind. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with pure bright mind.

<!-- @segment mn77:28.5 -->

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight.

<!-- @segment mn77:29.1 -->

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to understand this:

<!-- @segment mn77:29.2 -->

‘This body of mine is formed. It’s made up of the four principal states, produced by mother and father, built up from rice and porridge, liable to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and destruction.

<!-- @segment mn77:29.3 -->

And this consciousness of mine is attached to it, tied to it.’

<!-- @segment mn77:29.4 -->

Suppose there was a beryl gem that was naturally lustrous, eight-faceted, well-worked, transparent and clear, endowed with all good qualities.

<!-- @segment mn77:29.5 -->

And it was strung with a thread of blue, yellow, red, white, or golden brown.

<!-- @segment mn77:29.6 -->

And a person with clear eyes were to take it in their hand and check it:

<!-- @segment mn77:29.7 -->

‘This beryl gem is naturally lustrous, eight-faceted, well-worked, transparent and clear, endowed with all good qualities.

<!-- @segment mn77:29.8 -->

And it’s strung with a thread of blue, yellow, red, white, or golden brown.’

<!-- @segment mn77:29.9 -->

In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to understand this:

<!-- @segment mn77:29.10 -->

‘This body of mine is formed. It’s made up of the four principal states, produced by mother and father, built up from rice and porridge, liable to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and destruction.

<!-- @segment mn77:29.11 -->

And this consciousness of mine is attached to it, tied to it.’

<!-- @segment mn77:29.12 -->

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight.

<!-- @segment mn77:30.1 -->

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to create from this body another body—formed, mind-made, whole in its major and minor limbs, not deficient in any faculty.

<!-- @segment mn77:30.2 -->

Suppose a person was to draw a reed out from its sheath.

<!-- @segment mn77:30.3 -->

They’d think:

<!-- @segment mn77:30.4 -->

‘This is the reed, this is the sheath. The reed and the sheath are different things. The reed has been drawn out from the sheath.’

<!-- @segment mn77:30.5 -->

Or suppose a person was to draw a sword out from its scabbard.

<!-- @segment mn77:30.6 -->

They’d think:

<!-- @segment mn77:30.7 -->

‘This is the sword, this is the scabbard. The sword and the scabbard are different things. The sword has been drawn out from the scabbard.’

<!-- @segment mn77:30.8 -->

Or suppose a person was to draw a snake out from its slough.

<!-- @segment mn77:30.9 -->

They’d think:

<!-- @segment mn77:30.10 -->

‘This is the snake, this is the slough. The snake and the slough are different things. The snake has been drawn out from the slough.’

<!-- @segment mn77:30.11 -->

In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to create from this body another body—formed, mind-made, whole in its major and minor limbs, not deficient in any faculty.

<!-- @segment mn77:30.12 -->

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight.

<!-- @segment mn77:31.1 -->

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and becoming one again; materializing and dematerializing; going unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful. They control the body as far as the realm of divinity.

<!-- @segment mn77:31.2 -->

Suppose a deft potter or their apprentice had some well-prepared clay. They could produce any kind of pot that they like.

<!-- @segment mn77:31.3 -->

Or suppose a deft ivory-carver or their apprentice had some well-prepared ivory. They could produce any kind of ivory item that they like.

<!-- @segment mn77:31.4 -->

Or suppose a deft goldsmith or their apprentice had some well-prepared gold. They could produce any kind of gold item that they like.

<!-- @segment mn77:31.5 -->

In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to wield the many kinds of psychic power …

<!-- @segment mn77:31.6 -->

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight.

<!-- @segment mn77:32.1 -->

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use so that, with clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, they hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.

<!-- @segment mn77:32.2 -->

Suppose there was a powerful horn blower. They’d easily make themselves heard in the four quarters.

<!-- @segment mn77:32.3 -->

In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use so that, with clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, they hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.

<!-- @segment mn77:32.4 -->

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight.

<!-- @segment mn77:33.1 -->

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having encompassed them with their own mind.

<!-- @segment mn77:33.2 -->

They understand mind with greed as ‘mind with greed’,

<!-- @segment mn77:33.3 -->

and mind without greed as ‘mind without greed’;

<!-- @segment mn77:33.4 -->

mind with hate as ‘mind with hate’,

<!-- @segment mn77:33.5 -->

and mind without hate as ‘mind without hate’;

<!-- @segment mn77:33.6 -->

mind with delusion as ‘mind with delusion’,

<!-- @segment mn77:33.7 -->

and mind without delusion as ‘mind without delusion’;

<!-- @segment mn77:33.8 -->

constricted mind as ‘constricted mind’,

<!-- @segment mn77:33.9 -->

and scattered mind as ‘scattered mind’;

<!-- @segment mn77:33.10 -->

expansive mind as ‘expansive mind’,

<!-- @segment mn77:33.11 -->

and unexpansive mind as ‘unexpansive mind’;

<!-- @segment mn77:33.12 -->

mind that is not supreme as ‘mind that is not supreme’,

<!-- @segment mn77:33.13 -->

and mind that is supreme as ‘mind that is supreme’;

<!-- @segment mn77:33.14 -->

mind immersed in samādhi as ‘mind immersed in samādhi’,

<!-- @segment mn77:33.15 -->

and mind not immersed in samādhi as ‘mind not immersed in samādhi’;

<!-- @segment mn77:33.16 -->

freed mind as ‘freed mind’,

<!-- @segment mn77:33.17 -->

and unfreed mind as ‘unfreed mind’.

<!-- @segment mn77:33.18 -->

Suppose there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror or a clear bowl of water. If they had a spot they’d know ‘I have a spot’, and if they had no spots they’d know ‘I have no spots’.

<!-- @segment mn77:33.19 -->

In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having encompassed them with their own mind …

<!-- @segment mn77:33.36 -->

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight.

<!-- @segment mn77:34.1 -->

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to recollect the many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details.

<!-- @segment mn77:34.2 -->

Suppose a person was to leave their home village and go to another village. From that village they’d go to yet another village. And from that village they’d return to their home village. They’d think: ‘I went from my home village to another village. There I stood like this, sat like that, spoke like this, or kept silent like that. From that village I went to yet another village. There too I stood like this, sat like that, spoke like this, or kept silent like that. And from that village I returned to my home village.’

<!-- @segment mn77:34.3 -->

In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to recollect the many kinds of past lives.

<!-- @segment mn77:34.4 -->

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight.

<!-- @segment mn77:35.1 -->

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use so that, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds: ‘These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds.

<!-- @segment mn77:35.2 -->

Suppose there were two houses with doors. A person with clear eyes standing in between them would see humans entering and leaving a house and wandering to and fro.

<!-- @segment mn77:35.3 -->

In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use so that, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn …

<!-- @segment mn77:35.4 -->

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight.

<!-- @segment mn77:36.1 -->

Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.

<!-- @segment mn77:36.2 -->

Suppose that in a mountain glen there was a lake that was transparent, clear, and unclouded. A person with clear eyes standing on the bank would see the clams and mussels, and pebbles and gravel, and schools of fish swimming about or staying still. They’d think: ‘This lake is transparent, clear, and unclouded. And here are the clams and mussels, and pebbles and gravel, and schools of fish swimming about or staying still.’

<!-- @segment mn77:36.3 -->

In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.

<!-- @segment mn77:36.4 -->

And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight.

<!-- @segment mn77:37.1 -->

This is the fifth quality because of which my disciples are loyal to me.

<!-- @segment mn77:38.1 -->

These are the five qualities because of which my disciples honor, respect, revere, and venerate me; and honoring and respecting me, they remain loyal to me.”

<!-- @segment mn77:38.2 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn77:38.3 -->

Satisfied, the wanderer Sakuludāyī approved what the Buddha said.
