---
slug: mn80
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Vekhanasa
---

<!-- @segment mn80:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn80:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment mn80:2.1 -->

Then the wanderer Vekhanasa went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment mn80:2.2 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he stood to one side,

<!-- @segment mn80:2.3 -->

and expressed this heartfelt sentiment in the Buddha’s presence:

<!-- @segment mn80:2.4 -->

“This is the ultimate splendor, this is the ultimate splendor.”

<!-- @segment mn80:2.5 -->

“But Kaccāna, why do you say:

<!-- @segment mn80:2.6 -->

‘This is the ultimate splendor, this is the ultimate splendor.’

<!-- @segment mn80:2.7 -->

What is that ultimate splendor?”

<!-- @segment mn80:2.8 -->

“Worthy Gotama, the ultimate splendor is the splendor compared to which no other splendor is finer.”

<!-- @segment mn80:2.9 -->

“But what is that ultimate splendor compared to which no other splendor is finer?”

<!-- @segment mn80:2.10 -->

“Worthy Gotama, the ultimate splendor is the splendor compared to which no other splendor is finer.”

<!-- @segment mn80:3.1 -->

“Kaccāna, you could draw this out for a long time.

<!-- @segment mn80:3.2 -->

You say, ‘The ultimate splendor is the splendor compared to which no other splendor is finer.’ But you don’t describe that splendor.

<!-- @segment mn80:3.3 -->

Suppose a man was to say,

<!-- @segment mn80:3.4 -->

‘Whoever the finest lady in the land is, it is her that I want, her I desire!’

<!-- @segment mn80:3.5 -->

They’d say to him,

<!-- @segment mn80:3.6 -->

‘My man, that finest lady in the land who you desire—do you know whether she’s an aristocrat, a brahmin, a peasant, or a menial?’

<!-- @segment mn80:3.7 -->

Asked this, he’d say, ‘No.’

<!-- @segment mn80:3.8 -->

They’d say to him,

<!-- @segment mn80:3.9 -->

‘My man, that finest lady in the land who you desire—do you know her name or clan? Whether she’s tall or short or medium? Whether her skin is black, brown, or dingy? What village, town, or city she comes from?’

<!-- @segment mn80:3.10 -->

Asked this, he’d say, ‘No.’

<!-- @segment mn80:3.11 -->

They’d say to him,

<!-- @segment mn80:3.12 -->

‘My man, do you desire someone who you’ve never even known or seen?’

<!-- @segment mn80:3.13 -->

Asked this, he’d say, ‘Yes.’

<!-- @segment mn80:3.14 -->

What do you think, Kaccāna?

<!-- @segment mn80:3.15 -->

This being so, doesn’t that man’s statement turn out to have no demonstrable basis?”

<!-- @segment mn80:3.16 -->

“Clearly that’s the case, worthy Gotama.”

<!-- @segment mn80:3.17 -->

“In the same way, you say, ‘The ultimate splendor is the splendor compared to which no other splendor is finer.’ But you don’t describe that splendor.”

<!-- @segment mn80:4.1 -->

“Mister Gotama, suppose there was a beryl gem that was naturally lustrous, eight-faceted, well-worked. When placed on a cream rug it would shine and glow and radiate. Such is the splendor of the self that is free of disease after death.”

<!-- @segment mn80:5.1 -->

“What do you think, Kaccāna?

<!-- @segment mn80:5.2 -->

Which of these two has a finer splendor: such a beryl gem, or a firefly in the dark of night?”

<!-- @segment mn80:5.3 -->

“A firefly in the dark of night.”

<!-- @segment mn80:6.1 -->

“What do you think, Kaccāna?

<!-- @segment mn80:6.2 -->

Which of these two has a finer splendor: a firefly in the dark of night, or an oil lamp in the dark of night?”

<!-- @segment mn80:6.3 -->

“An oil lamp in the dark of night.”

<!-- @segment mn80:7.1 -->

“What do you think, Kaccāna?

<!-- @segment mn80:7.2 -->

Which of these two has a finer splendor: an oil lamp in the dark of night, or a great mass of fire in the dark of night?”

<!-- @segment mn80:7.3 -->

“A great mass of fire in the dark of night.”

<!-- @segment mn80:8.1 -->

“What do you think, Kaccāna?

<!-- @segment mn80:8.2 -->

Which of these two has a finer splendor: a great mass of fire in the dark of night, or the Morning Star in the clear and cloudless heavens at the crack of dawn?”

<!-- @segment mn80:8.3 -->

“The Morning Star in the clear and cloudless heavens at the crack of dawn.”

<!-- @segment mn80:9.1 -->

“What do you think, Kaccāna?

<!-- @segment mn80:9.2 -->

Which of these two has a finer splendor: the Morning Star in the clear and cloudless heavens at the crack of dawn, or the full moon at midnight in the clear and cloudless heavens on the fifteenth day sabbath?”

<!-- @segment mn80:9.3 -->

“The full moon at midnight in the clear and cloudless heavens on the fifteenth day sabbath.”

<!-- @segment mn80:10.1 -->

“What do you think, Kaccāna?

<!-- @segment mn80:10.2 -->

Which of these two has a finer splendor: the full moon at midnight in the clear and cloudless heavens on the fifteenth day sabbath, or the sun at midday in the clear and cloudless heavens in the last month of the rainy season, in autumn?”

<!-- @segment mn80:10.3 -->

“The sun at midday in the clear and cloudless heavens in the last month of the rainy season, in autumn.”

<!-- @segment mn80:11.1 -->

“Beyond this, Kaccāna, I know very many gods on whom the luminosity of the sun and moon makes no impression.

<!-- @segment mn80:11.2 -->

Nevertheless, I do not say:

<!-- @segment mn80:11.3 -->

‘The splendor compared to which no other splendor is finer.’

<!-- @segment mn80:11.4 -->

But of the splendor inferior to a firefly you say, ‘This is the ultimate splendor.’ And you don’t describe that splendor.

<!-- @segment mn80:12.1 -->

Kaccāna, there are these five kinds of sensual stimulation.

<!-- @segment mn80:12.2 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment mn80:12.3 -->

Sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing.

<!-- @segment mn80:12.4 -->

Sounds known by the ear …

<!-- @segment mn80:12.5 -->

Smells known by the nose …

<!-- @segment mn80:12.6 -->

Tastes known by the tongue …

<!-- @segment mn80:12.7 -->

Touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing.

<!-- @segment mn80:12.8 -->

These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

<!-- @segment mn80:13.1 -->

The pleasure and happiness that arises from these five kinds of sensual stimulation is called sensual pleasure.

<!-- @segment mn80:13.2 -->

‘From the senses comes sensual pleasure. Beyond sensual pleasure is the pleasure that surmounts the sensual, which is said to be the best of these.’”

<!-- @segment mn80:14.1 -->

When he said this, Vekhanasa said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn80:14.2 -->

“It’s incredible, worthy Gotama, it’s amazing!

<!-- @segment mn80:14.3 -->

How well said this was by the worthy Gotama!

<!-- @segment mn80:14.4 -->

‘From the senses comes sensual pleasure. Beyond sensual pleasure is the pleasure that surmounts the sensual, which is said to be the best of these.’

<!-- @segment mn80:14.5 -->

Worthy Gotama, from the senses comes sensual pleasure. Beyond sensual pleasure is the pleasure that surmounts the sensual, which is said to be the best of these.”

<!-- @segment mn80:14.6 -->

“Kaccāna, since you have a different view, creed, and belief, then, unless you dedicate yourself to practice with the guidance of tradition, it’s hard for you to understand

<!-- @segment mn80:14.7 -->

the senses, sensual pleasure, and the pleasure that surmounts the sensual.

<!-- @segment mn80:14.8 -->

There are mendicants who are perfected, who have ended the defilements, completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their heart’s goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and are rightly freed through enlightenment. They can understand

<!-- @segment mn80:14.9 -->

the senses, sensual pleasure, and the pleasure that surmounts the sensual.”

<!-- @segment mn80:15.1 -->

When he said this, Vekhanasa became angry and upset. He even attacked and badmouthed the Buddha himself, saying,

<!-- @segment mn80:15.2 -->

“The ascetic Gotama will be worsted!” He said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn80:15.3 -->

“This is exactly what happens with some ascetics and brahmins. Not knowing the first beginning or seeing the final end, they nevertheless claim:

<!-- @segment mn80:15.4 -->

‘We understand: “Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.”’

<!-- @segment mn80:15.5 -->

Their statement turns out to be a joke—mere words, vacuous and hollow.”

<!-- @segment mn80:16.1 -->

“Kaccāna, there are some ascetics and brahmins who, not knowing the first beginning or seeing the final end, nevertheless claim:

<!-- @segment mn80:16.2 -->

‘We understand: “Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.”’

<!-- @segment mn80:16.3 -->

There is a legitimate refutation of them.

<!-- @segment mn80:16.4 -->

Nevertheless, Kaccāna, leave aside the first beginning and the final end.

<!-- @segment mn80:16.5 -->

Let a sensible person come—neither devious nor deceitful, a person of integrity. I teach and instruct them.

<!-- @segment mn80:16.6 -->

Practicing as instructed they will soon know and see for themselves,

<!-- @segment mn80:16.7 -->

‘So this is how to be rightly released from the bond, that is, the bond of ignorance.’

<!-- @segment mn80:16.8 -->

Suppose there was a little baby bound with swaddling up to the neck.

<!-- @segment mn80:16.9 -->

As they grow up and their senses mature, they’re accordingly released from those bonds.

<!-- @segment mn80:16.10 -->

They’d know ‘I’m released,’ and there would be no more bonds.

<!-- @segment mn80:16.11 -->

In the same way, let a sensible person come—neither devious nor deceitful, a person of integrity. I teach and instruct them.

<!-- @segment mn80:16.12 -->

Practicing as instructed they will soon know and see for themselves,

<!-- @segment mn80:16.13 -->

‘So this is how to be rightly released from the bond, that is, the bond of ignorance.’”

<!-- @segment mn80:17.1 -->

When he said this, Vekhanasa said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn80:17.2 -->

“Excellent, worthy Gotama! …

<!-- @segment mn80:17.3 -->

From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”

<!-- @segment mn80:17.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn80:17.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn80:18.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn80:18.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn80:18.3 -->
