---
slug: mn82
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Raṭṭhapāla
---

<!-- @segment mn82:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn82:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kurus together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he arrived at a town of the Kurus named Thullakoṭṭhika.

<!-- @segment mn82:2.1 -->

The brahmins and householders of Thullakoṭṭhika heard:

<!-- @segment mn82:2.2 -->

“It seems the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—has arrived at Thullakoṭṭhika, together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants.

<!-- @segment mn82:2.3 -->

He has this good reputation:

<!-- @segment mn82:2.4 -->

‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’

<!-- @segment mn82:2.5 -->

He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others.

<!-- @segment mn82:2.6 -->

He proclaims a teaching that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure.

<!-- @segment mn82:2.7 -->

It’s good to see such perfected ones.”

<!-- @segment mn82:3.1 -->

Then the brahmins and householders of Thullakoṭṭhika went up to the Buddha. Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite conversation, some held up their cupped palms toward the Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent.

<!-- @segment mn82:3.2 -->

When they were seated, the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired them with a Dhamma talk.

<!-- @segment mn82:4.1 -->

Now at that time a gentleman named Raṭṭhapāla, the son of the leading clan in Thullakoṭṭhika, was sitting in the assembly.

<!-- @segment mn82:4.2 -->

He thought,

<!-- @segment mn82:4.3 -->

“As I understand the Buddha’s teaching, it’s not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell.

<!-- @segment mn82:4.4 -->

Why don’t I shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from lay life to homelessness?”

<!-- @segment mn82:5.1 -->

Then, having approved and agreed with what the Buddha said, the brahmins and householders of Thullakoṭṭhika rose from their seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on their right, before leaving.

<!-- @segment mn82:6.1 -->

Soon after they left, Raṭṭhapāla went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn82:6.2 -->

“Sir, as I understand the Buddha’s teaching, it’s not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell.

<!-- @segment mn82:6.3 -->

I wish to shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment mn82:6.4 -->

Sir, may I receive the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha’s presence?

<!-- @segment mn82:6.5 -->

May the Buddha please give me the going forth!”

<!-- @segment mn82:6.6 -->

“But, Raṭṭhapāla, do you have your parents’ permission?”

<!-- @segment mn82:6.7 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment mn82:6.8 -->

“Raṭṭhapāla, Buddhas don’t give the going forth to the child of parents who haven’t given their permission.”

<!-- @segment mn82:6.9 -->

“I’ll make sure, sir, to get my parents’ permission.”

<!-- @segment mn82:7.1 -->

Then Raṭṭhapāla rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha. Then he went to his parents and said,

<!-- @segment mn82:7.2 -->

“Mum and dad, as I understand the Buddha’s teachings, it’s not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell.

<!-- @segment mn82:7.3 -->

I wish to shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment mn82:7.4 -->

Please give me permission to go forth.”

<!-- @segment mn82:7.5 -->

When he said this, Raṭṭhapāla’s parents said to him,

<!-- @segment mn82:7.6 -->

“But, dear Raṭṭhapāla, you’re our only child. You’re dear to us and we love you. You’re pampered and raised in comfort.

<!-- @segment mn82:7.7 -->

You know nothing of suffering.

<!-- @segment mn82:7.8 -->

Even when you die we will lose you against our wishes.

<!-- @segment mn82:7.9 -->

So how can we allow you to go forth while you’re still alive?”

<!-- @segment mn82:7.10 -->

For a second time,

<!-- @segment mn82:7.11 -->

and a third time, Raṭṭhapāla asked his parents for permission, but got the same reply.

<!-- @segment mn82:7.12 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:7.13 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:7.14 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:7.15 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:7.16 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:7.17 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:7.18 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:7.19 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:7.20 -->

Then Raṭṭhapāla thought,

<!-- @segment mn82:7.21 -->

“My parents don’t allow me to go forth.” He laid down right there on the bare ground, saying,

<!-- @segment mn82:7.22 -->

“I’ll either die right here or go forth.”

<!-- @segment mn82:7.23 -->

And he refused to eat, up to the seventh meal.

<!-- @segment mn82:8.1 -->

Then Raṭṭhapāla’s parents said to him,

<!-- @segment mn82:8.2 -->

“Dear Raṭṭhapāla, you’re our only child. You’re dear to us and we love you. You’re pampered and raised in comfort.

<!-- @segment mn82:8.3 -->

You know nothing of suffering.

<!-- @segment mn82:8.4 -->

When you die we will lose you against our wishes.

<!-- @segment mn82:8.5 -->

So how can we allow you to go forth from lay life to homelessness while you’re still living?

<!-- @segment mn82:8.6 -->

Get up, Raṭṭhapāla! Eat, drink, and amuse yourself.

<!-- @segment mn82:8.7 -->

While enjoying sensual pleasures, delight in making merit.

<!-- @segment mn82:8.8 -->

We don’t allow you to go forth.

<!-- @segment mn82:8.9 -->

When you die we will lose you against our wishes.

<!-- @segment mn82:8.10 -->

So how can we allow you to go forth while you’re still alive?”

<!-- @segment mn82:8.11 -->

When they said this, Raṭṭhapāla kept silent.

<!-- @segment mn82:8.12 -->

For a second time,

<!-- @segment mn82:8.13 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:8.14 -->

and a third time, Raṭṭhapāla’s parents made the same request.

<!-- @segment mn82:8.15 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:8.16 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:8.17 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:8.18 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:8.19 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:8.20 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:8.21 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:8.22 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:9.1 -->

And for a third time, Raṭṭhapāla kept silent. Raṭṭhapāla’s parents then went to see his friends. They told them of the situation and asked for their help.

<!-- @segment mn82:10.1 -->

Then Raṭṭhapāla’s friends went to him and said,

<!-- @segment mn82:10.2 -->

“Our dear Raṭṭhapāla, you are your parents’ only child. You’re dear to them and they love you. You’re pampered and raised in comfort.

<!-- @segment mn82:10.3 -->

You know nothing of suffering.

<!-- @segment mn82:10.4 -->

When you die your parents will lose you against their wishes.

<!-- @segment mn82:10.5 -->

So how can they allow you to go forth while you’re still alive?

<!-- @segment mn82:10.6 -->

Get up, Raṭṭhapāla! Eat, drink, and amuse yourself.

<!-- @segment mn82:10.7 -->

While enjoying sensual pleasures, delight in making merit.

<!-- @segment mn82:10.8 -->

Your parents will not allow you to go forth.

<!-- @segment mn82:10.9 -->

Even when you die your parents will lose you against their wishes.

<!-- @segment mn82:10.10 -->

So how can they allow you to go forth while you’re still alive?”

<!-- @segment mn82:10.11 -->

When they said this, Raṭṭhapāla kept silent.

<!-- @segment mn82:10.12 -->

For a second time,

<!-- @segment mn82:10.13 -->

and a third time, Raṭṭhapāla’s friends made the same request.

<!-- @segment mn82:10.14 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:10.15 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:10.16 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:10.17 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:10.18 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:10.19 -->

And for a third time, Raṭṭhapāla kept silent.

<!-- @segment mn82:11.1 -->

Then Raṭṭhapāla’s friends went to his parents and said,

<!-- @segment mn82:11.2 -->

“Mum and dad, Raṭṭhapāla is lying there on the bare ground saying:

<!-- @segment mn82:11.3 -->

‘I’ll either die right here or go forth.’

<!-- @segment mn82:11.4 -->

If you don’t allow him to go forth, he’ll die there.

<!-- @segment mn82:11.5 -->

But if you do allow him to go forth, you’ll see him again afterwards.

<!-- @segment mn82:11.6 -->

And if he doesn’t enjoy the renunciate life, where else will he have to go? He’ll come right back here.

<!-- @segment mn82:11.7 -->

Please give Raṭṭhapāla permission to go forth.”

<!-- @segment mn82:11.8 -->

“Then, dears, we give Raṭṭhapāla permission to go forth.

<!-- @segment mn82:11.9 -->

But once gone forth he must visit his parents.”

<!-- @segment mn82:11.10 -->

Then Raṭṭhapāla’s friends went to him and said,

<!-- @segment mn82:11.11 -->

“Get up, Raṭṭhapāla! Your parents have given you permission to go forth from lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment mn82:11.12 -->

But once gone forth you must visit your parents.”

<!-- @segment mn82:12.1 -->

Raṭṭhapāla got up and regained his strength. He went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn82:12.2 -->

“Sir, I have my parents’ permission to go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment mn82:12.3 -->

May the Buddha please give me the going forth.”

<!-- @segment mn82:13.1 -->

And Raṭṭhapāla received the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha’s presence.

<!-- @segment mn82:13.2 -->

Not long after Venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s ordination, a fortnight later, the Buddha—having stayed in Thullakoṭṭhika as long as he pleased—set out for Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment mn82:13.3 -->

Traveling stage by stage, he arrived at Sāvatthī,

<!-- @segment mn82:13.4 -->

where he stayed in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment mn82:14.1 -->

Then Venerable Raṭṭhapāla, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment mn82:14.2 -->

He understood: “Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further for this place.”

<!-- @segment mn82:14.3 -->

And Venerable Raṭṭhapāla became one of the perfected.

<!-- @segment mn82:15.1 -->

Then he went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn82:15.2 -->

“Sir, I would like to visit my parents, if the Buddha allows it.”

<!-- @segment mn82:15.3 -->

Then the Buddha focused on encompassing Raṭṭhapāla’s mind.

<!-- @segment mn82:15.4 -->

When he knew that

<!-- @segment mn82:15.5 -->

it was impossible for Raṭṭhapāla to resign the training and return to a lesser life, he said,

<!-- @segment mn82:15.6 -->

“Please, Raṭṭhapāla, go at your convenience.”

<!-- @segment mn82:16.1 -->

And then Raṭṭhapāla rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right. Then he set his lodgings in order and, taking his bowl and robe, set out for Thullakoṭṭhika.

<!-- @segment mn82:16.2 -->

Traveling stage by stage, he arrived at Thullakoṭṭhika,

<!-- @segment mn82:16.3 -->

where he stayed in King Koravya’s deer range.

<!-- @segment mn82:16.4 -->

Then Raṭṭhapāla robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Thullakoṭṭhika for alms.

<!-- @segment mn82:16.5 -->

Wandering indiscriminately for almsfood, he approached his own father’s house.

<!-- @segment mn82:17.1 -->

Now at that time Raṭṭhapāla’s father was having his hair dressed in the hall of the middle gate.

<!-- @segment mn82:17.2 -->

He saw Raṭṭhapāla coming off in the distance

<!-- @segment mn82:17.3 -->

and said,

<!-- @segment mn82:17.4 -->

“Our dear and beloved only son was made to go forth by these shavelings, these fake ascetics!”

<!-- @segment mn82:17.5 -->

And at his own father’s home Raṭṭhapāla received neither alms nor a polite refusal,

<!-- @segment mn82:17.6 -->

but only abuse.

<!-- @segment mn82:18.1 -->

Now at that time a family bondservant wanted to throw away the previous night’s porridge.

<!-- @segment mn82:18.2 -->

So Raṭṭhapāla said to her,

<!-- @segment mn82:18.3 -->

“If that’s to be thrown away, sister, pour it here in my bowl.”

<!-- @segment mn82:18.4 -->

As she was pouring the porridge into his bowl, she recognized the features of his hands, feet, and voice.

<!-- @segment mn82:18.5 -->

She then went to his mother and said,

<!-- @segment mn82:18.6 -->

“Please, madam, you should know this.

<!-- @segment mn82:18.7 -->

Master Raṭṭhapāla has arrived.”

<!-- @segment mn82:18.8 -->

“If you speak the truth, wench, I’ll make you a free woman!”

<!-- @segment mn82:18.9 -->

Then Raṭṭhapāla’s mother went to his father and said,

<!-- @segment mn82:18.10 -->

“Please householder, you should know this.

<!-- @segment mn82:18.11 -->

It seems our son Raṭṭhapāla has arrived.”

<!-- @segment mn82:19.1 -->

Now at that time Raṭṭhapāla was eating last night’s porridge by a wall.

<!-- @segment mn82:19.2 -->

Then Raṭṭhapāla’s father went up to him and said,

<!-- @segment mn82:19.3 -->

“Dear Raṭṭhapāla! How can you be eating last night’s porridge?

<!-- @segment mn82:19.4 -->

Why not go to your own home?”

<!-- @segment mn82:19.5 -->

“Householder, how could those of us who have gone forth from the lay life to homelessness have a house?

<!-- @segment mn82:19.6 -->

We are homeless, householder.

<!-- @segment mn82:19.7 -->

I came to your house, but there I received neither alms nor a polite refusal,

<!-- @segment mn82:19.8 -->

but only abuse.”

<!-- @segment mn82:19.9 -->

“Come, dear Raṭṭhapāla, let’s go to the house.”

<!-- @segment mn82:19.10 -->

“Enough, householder. My meal is finished for today.”

<!-- @segment mn82:19.11 -->

“Well then, dear Raṭṭhapāla, please accept tomorrow’s meal from me.”

<!-- @segment mn82:19.12 -->

Raṭṭhapāla consented with silence.

<!-- @segment mn82:20.1 -->

Then, knowing that Raṭṭhapāla had consented, his father went back to his own house. He made a heap of gold, both coined and uncoined, and hid it under mats. Then he addressed Raṭṭhapāla’s former wives,

<!-- @segment mn82:20.2 -->

“Please, daughters-in-law, adorn yourselves in the way that our son Raṭṭhapāla found you most adorable.”

<!-- @segment mn82:21.1 -->

And when the night had passed Raṭṭhapāla’s father had delicious fresh and cooked foods prepared in his own home, and announced the time to the Venerable Raṭṭhapāla, saying,

<!-- @segment mn82:21.2 -->

“Sir, it’s time. The meal is ready.”

<!-- @segment mn82:22.1 -->

Then Raṭṭhapāla robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to his father’s home, and sat down on the seat spread out. Raṭṭhapāla’s father, revealing the heap of gold, both coined and uncoined, said to him,

<!-- @segment mn82:22.2 -->

“Dear Raṭṭhapāla, this is your maternal fortune. There’s another paternal fortune, and an ancestral one.

<!-- @segment mn82:22.3 -->

You can both enjoy your wealth and make merit.

<!-- @segment mn82:22.4 -->

Come, return to a lesser life, enjoy wealth, and make merit!”

<!-- @segment mn82:22.5 -->

“If you’d follow my advice, householder, you’d have this heap of gold, both coined and uncoined, loaded on a cart and carried away to be dumped in the middle of the Ganges river.

<!-- @segment mn82:22.6 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment mn82:22.7 -->

Because this will bring you nothing but sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.”

<!-- @segment mn82:23.1 -->

Then Raṭṭhapāla’s former wives each clasped his feet and said,

<!-- @segment mn82:23.2 -->

“What are they like, master, the nymphs for whom you lead the spiritual life?”

<!-- @segment mn82:23.3 -->

“Sisters, I don’t lead the spiritual life for the sake of nymphs.”

<!-- @segment mn82:23.4 -->

Saying, “Our master Raṭṭhapāla addresses us as sisters!” they fainted right away.

<!-- @segment mn82:24.1 -->

Then Raṭṭhapāla said to his father,

<!-- @segment mn82:24.2 -->

“If there is food to be given, householder, please give it.

<!-- @segment mn82:24.3 -->

But don’t harass me.”

<!-- @segment mn82:24.4 -->

“Eat, dear Raṭṭhapāla. The meal is ready.”

<!-- @segment mn82:24.5 -->

Then Raṭṭhapāla’s father served and satisfied Venerable Raṭṭhapāla with his own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods.

<!-- @segment mn82:24.6 -->

When he had eaten and washed his hand and bowl, he spoke this verse while standing right there:

<!-- @segment mn82:25.1 -->

“See this fancy puppet,

<!-- @segment mn82:25.2 -->

a body built of sores,

<!-- @segment mn82:25.3 -->

diseased, obsessed over,

<!-- @segment mn82:25.4 -->

in which nothing lasts at all.

<!-- @segment mn82:25.5 -->

See this fancy figure,

<!-- @segment mn82:25.6 -->

with its gems and earrings;

<!-- @segment mn82:25.7 -->

it is bones swathed in skin,

<!-- @segment mn82:25.8 -->

made pretty by its clothes.

<!-- @segment mn82:25.9 -->

Rouged feet

<!-- @segment mn82:25.10 -->

and powdered face

<!-- @segment mn82:25.11 -->

may be enough to beguile a fool,

<!-- @segment mn82:25.12 -->

but not a seeker of the far shore.

<!-- @segment mn82:25.13 -->

Hair in eight braids

<!-- @segment mn82:25.14 -->

and eyeshadow

<!-- @segment mn82:25.15 -->

may be enough to beguile a fool,

<!-- @segment mn82:25.16 -->

but not a seeker of the far shore.

<!-- @segment mn82:25.17 -->

A rotting body all adorned

<!-- @segment mn82:25.18 -->

like a freshly painted makeup box

<!-- @segment mn82:25.19 -->

may be enough to beguile a fool,

<!-- @segment mn82:25.20 -->

but not a seeker of the far shore.

<!-- @segment mn82:25.21 -->

The hunter laid his snare,

<!-- @segment mn82:25.22 -->

but the deer didn’t spring the trap.

<!-- @segment mn82:25.23 -->

I’ve eaten the bait and now I go,

<!-- @segment mn82:25.24 -->

leaving the trapper to lament.”

<!-- @segment mn82:26.1 -->

Then Raṭṭhapāla, having spoke this verse while standing, went to King Koravya’s deer range and sat at the root of a tree for the day’s meditation.

<!-- @segment mn82:27.1 -->

Then King Koravya addressed his gamekeeper,

<!-- @segment mn82:27.2 -->

“My good gamekeeper, tidy up the park of the deer range.

<!-- @segment mn82:27.3 -->

We will go to see the scenery.”

<!-- @segment mn82:27.4 -->

“Yes, Your Majesty,” replied the gamekeeper. While tidying the deer range he saw Raṭṭhapāla sitting in meditation.

<!-- @segment mn82:27.5 -->

Seeing this, he went to the king, and said,

<!-- @segment mn82:27.6 -->

“The deer range is tidy, sire.

<!-- @segment mn82:27.7 -->

And the gentleman named Raṭṭhapāla, the son of the leading clan in Thullakoṭṭhika, of whom you have often spoken highly, is meditating there at the root of a tree.”

<!-- @segment mn82:27.8 -->

“Well then, my good gamekeeper, that’s enough of the park for today.

<!-- @segment mn82:27.9 -->

Now I shall pay homage to the worthy Raṭṭhapāla.”

<!-- @segment mn82:28.1 -->

And then King Koravya said, “Distribute the fresh and cooked foods that have been prepared there.” He had the finest carriages harnessed. Then he mounted a fine carriage and, along with other fine carriages, set out in full royal pomp from Thullakoṭṭhika to see Raṭṭhapāla.

<!-- @segment mn82:28.2 -->

He went by carriage as far as the terrain allowed, then descended and approached Raṭṭhapāla on foot, together with a group of eminent officials. They exchanged greetings, and, when the greetings and polite conversation were over, he stood to one side and said to Raṭṭhapāla:

<!-- @segment mn82:28.3 -->

“Here, worthy Raṭṭhapāla, sit on this elephant rug.”

<!-- @segment mn82:28.4 -->

“Enough, great king, you sit on it.

<!-- @segment mn82:28.5 -->

I’m sitting on my own seat.”

<!-- @segment mn82:28.6 -->

So the king sat down on the seat spread out, and said:

<!-- @segment mn82:29.1 -->

“Worthy Raṭṭhapāla, there are these four kinds of decay. Because of these, some people shave off their hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment mn82:29.2 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment mn82:29.3 -->

Decay due to old age, decay due to sickness, decay of wealth, and decay of relatives.

<!-- @segment mn82:30.1 -->

And what is decay due to old age?

<!-- @segment mn82:30.2 -->

It’s when someone is old, elderly, and senior, advanced in years, and has reached the final stage of life.

<!-- @segment mn82:30.3 -->

They reflect:

<!-- @segment mn82:30.4 -->

‘I’m now old, elderly, and senior. I’m advanced in years and have reached the final stage of life.

<!-- @segment mn82:30.5 -->

It’s not easy for me to acquire more wealth or to increase the wealth I’ve already acquired.

<!-- @segment mn82:30.6 -->

Why don’t I shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness?’

<!-- @segment mn82:30.7 -->

So because of that decay due to old age they go forth.

<!-- @segment mn82:30.8 -->

This is called decay due to old age.

<!-- @segment mn82:30.9 -->

But worthy Raṭṭhapāla is now a youth, young, with pristine black hair, blessed with youth, in the prime of life.

<!-- @segment mn82:30.10 -->

You have no decay due to old age.

<!-- @segment mn82:30.11 -->

So what did you know or see or hear that made you go forth?

<!-- @segment mn82:31.1 -->

And what is decay due to sickness?

<!-- @segment mn82:31.2 -->

It’s when someone is sick, suffering, gravely ill.

<!-- @segment mn82:31.3 -->

They reflect:

<!-- @segment mn82:31.4 -->

‘I’m now sick, suffering, gravely ill.

<!-- @segment mn82:31.5 -->

It’s not easy for me to acquire more wealth or to increase the wealth I’ve already acquired.

<!-- @segment mn82:31.6 -->

Why don’t I go forth from the lay life to homelessness?’

<!-- @segment mn82:31.7 -->

So because of that decay due to sickness they go forth.

<!-- @segment mn82:31.8 -->

This is called decay due to sickness.

<!-- @segment mn82:31.9 -->

But worthy Raṭṭhapāla is now rarely ill or unwell. Your stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too cold.

<!-- @segment mn82:31.10 -->

You have no decay due to sickness.

<!-- @segment mn82:31.11 -->

So what did you know or see or hear that made you go forth?

<!-- @segment mn82:32.1 -->

And what is decay of wealth?

<!-- @segment mn82:32.2 -->

It’s when someone is rich, affluent, and wealthy.

<!-- @segment mn82:32.3 -->

But gradually their wealth dwindles away.

<!-- @segment mn82:32.4 -->

They reflect:

<!-- @segment mn82:32.5 -->

‘I used to be rich, affluent, and wealthy.

<!-- @segment mn82:32.6 -->

But gradually my wealth has dwindled away.

<!-- @segment mn82:32.7 -->

It’s not easy for me to acquire more wealth or to increase the wealth I’ve already acquired.

<!-- @segment mn82:32.8 -->

Why don’t I go forth from the lay life to homelessness?’

<!-- @segment mn82:32.9 -->

So because of that decay of wealth they go forth.

<!-- @segment mn82:32.10 -->

This is called decay of wealth.

<!-- @segment mn82:32.11 -->

But worthy Raṭṭhapāla is the son of the leading clan here in Thullakoṭṭhika.

<!-- @segment mn82:32.12 -->

You have no decay of wealth.

<!-- @segment mn82:32.13 -->

So what did you know or see or hear that made you go forth?

<!-- @segment mn82:33.1 -->

And what is decay of relatives?

<!-- @segment mn82:33.2 -->

It’s when someone has many friends and colleagues, relatives and kin.

<!-- @segment mn82:33.3 -->

But gradually their relatives dwindle away.

<!-- @segment mn82:33.4 -->

They reflect:

<!-- @segment mn82:33.5 -->

‘I used to have many friends and colleagues, relatives and kin.

<!-- @segment mn82:33.6 -->

But gradually they’ve dwindled away.

<!-- @segment mn82:33.7 -->

It’s not easy for me to acquire more wealth or to increase the wealth I’ve already acquired.

<!-- @segment mn82:33.8 -->

Why don’t I shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness?’

<!-- @segment mn82:33.9 -->

So because of that decay of relatives they go forth.

<!-- @segment mn82:33.10 -->

This is called decay of relatives.

<!-- @segment mn82:33.11 -->

But worthy Raṭṭhapāla has many friends and colleagues, relatives and kin right here in Thullakoṭṭhika.

<!-- @segment mn82:33.12 -->

You have no decay of relatives.

<!-- @segment mn82:33.13 -->

So what did you know or see or hear that made you go forth?

<!-- @segment mn82:34.1 -->

There are these four kinds of decay. Because of these, some people shave off their hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment mn82:34.2 -->

Worthy Raṭṭhapāla has none of these.

<!-- @segment mn82:34.3 -->

So what did you know or see or hear that made you go forth?”

<!-- @segment mn82:35.1 -->

“Great king, the Blessed One who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha has taught these four summaries of the teaching for recitation. It was after knowing and seeing and hearing these that I went forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment mn82:35.2 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment mn82:36.1 -->

‘The world is unstable and swept away.’

<!-- @segment mn82:36.2 -->

This is the first summary.

<!-- @segment mn82:36.3 -->

‘The world has no shelter and no savior.’

<!-- @segment mn82:36.4 -->

This is the second summary.

<!-- @segment mn82:36.5 -->

‘The world has no owner—you must leave it all behind and pass on.’

<!-- @segment mn82:36.6 -->

This is the third summary.

<!-- @segment mn82:36.7 -->

‘The world is wanting, insatiable, the slave of craving.’

<!-- @segment mn82:36.8 -->

This is the fourth summary.

<!-- @segment mn82:37.1 -->

The Blessed One who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha taught these four summaries of the teaching. It was after knowing and seeing and hearing these that I went forth from the lay life to homelessness.”

<!-- @segment mn82:38.1 -->

“‘The world is unstable and swept away.’

<!-- @segment mn82:38.2 -->

So the worthy Raṭṭhapāla said.

<!-- @segment mn82:38.3 -->

How should I see the meaning of this statement?”

<!-- @segment mn82:38.4 -->

“What do you think, great king?

<!-- @segment mn82:38.5 -->

When you were twenty or twenty-five years of age, were you proficient at riding elephants, horses, and chariots, and at archery and swordsmanship? Were you strong in thigh and arm, capable, and battle-hardened?”

<!-- @segment mn82:38.6 -->

“I was, worthy Raṭṭhapāla.

<!-- @segment mn82:38.7 -->

Sometimes it seems as if I had superpowers then. I don’t see anyone who could have equalled me in strength.”

<!-- @segment mn82:38.8 -->

“What do you think, great king?

<!-- @segment mn82:38.9 -->

These days are you just as strong in thigh and arm, capable, and battle-hardened?”

<!-- @segment mn82:38.10 -->

“No, worthy Raṭṭhapāla.

<!-- @segment mn82:38.11 -->

For now I am old, elderly, and senior, I’m advanced in years and have reached the final stage of life. I am eighty years old.

<!-- @segment mn82:38.12 -->

Sometimes I intend to step in one place, but my foot goes somewhere else.”

<!-- @segment mn82:38.13 -->

“This is what the Buddha was referring to when he said:

<!-- @segment mn82:38.14 -->

‘The world is unstable and swept away.’”

<!-- @segment mn82:38.15 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:38.16 -->

“It’s incredible, worthy Raṭṭhapāla, it’s amazing,

<!-- @segment mn82:38.17 -->

how well said this was by the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn82:38.18 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:38.19 -->

For the world is indeed unstable and swept away.

<!-- @segment mn82:39.1 -->

In this royal court you can find divisions of elephants, cavalry, chariots, and infantry. They will serve to defend us from any threats. Yet you said:

<!-- @segment mn82:39.2 -->

‘The world has no shelter and no savior.’

<!-- @segment mn82:39.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:39.4 -->

How should I see the meaning of this statement?”

<!-- @segment mn82:39.5 -->

“What do you think, great king?

<!-- @segment mn82:39.6 -->

Do you have any chronic ailments?”

<!-- @segment mn82:39.7 -->

“Yes, I do.

<!-- @segment mn82:39.8 -->

Sometimes my friends and colleagues, relatives and kin surround me, thinking:

<!-- @segment mn82:39.9 -->

‘Now the king will die! Now the king will die!’”

<!-- @segment mn82:39.10 -->

“What do you think, great king?

<!-- @segment mn82:39.11 -->

Can you get your friends and colleagues, relatives and kin to help:

<!-- @segment mn82:39.12 -->

‘Please, my dear friends and colleagues, relatives and kin, all of you here share my pain so that I may feel less pain.’

<!-- @segment mn82:39.13 -->

Or must you alone feel that pain?”

<!-- @segment mn82:39.14 -->

“I can’t get my friends to share my pain.

<!-- @segment mn82:39.15 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:39.16 -->

Rather, I alone must feel it.”

<!-- @segment mn82:39.17 -->

“This is what the Buddha was referring to when he said:

<!-- @segment mn82:39.18 -->

‘The world has no shelter and no savior.’”

<!-- @segment mn82:39.19 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:39.20 -->

“It’s incredible, worthy Raṭṭhapāla, it’s amazing,

<!-- @segment mn82:39.21 -->

how well said this was by the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn82:39.22 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:39.23 -->

For the world indeed has no shelter and no savior.

<!-- @segment mn82:40.1 -->

In this royal court you can find abundant gold, both coined and uncoined, stored above and below ground. Yet you said:

<!-- @segment mn82:40.2 -->

‘The world has no owner—you must leave it all behind and pass on.’

<!-- @segment mn82:40.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:40.4 -->

How should I see the meaning of this statement?”

<!-- @segment mn82:40.5 -->

“What do you think, great king?

<!-- @segment mn82:40.6 -->

These days you amuse yourself, supplied and provided with the five kinds of sensual stimulation. But is there any way to ensure that in the next life

<!-- @segment mn82:40.7 -->

you will continue to amuse yourself in the same way, supplied and provided with the same five kinds of sensual stimulation? Or will others make use of this property, while you pass on according to your deeds?”

<!-- @segment mn82:40.8 -->

“There’s no way to ensure that I will continue to amuse myself in the same way.

<!-- @segment mn82:40.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:40.10 -->

Rather, others will take over this property, while I pass on according to my deeds.”

<!-- @segment mn82:40.11 -->

“This is what the Buddha was referring to when he said:

<!-- @segment mn82:40.12 -->

‘The world has no owner—you must leave it all behind and pass on.’”

<!-- @segment mn82:40.13 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:40.14 -->

“It’s incredible, worthy Raṭṭhapāla, it’s amazing,

<!-- @segment mn82:40.15 -->

how well said this was by the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn82:40.16 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:40.17 -->

For the world indeed has no owner—you must leave it all behind and pass on.

<!-- @segment mn82:41.1 -->

You also said this: ‘The world is wanting, insatiable, the slave of craving.’

<!-- @segment mn82:41.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:41.3 -->

How should I see the meaning of this statement?”

<!-- @segment mn82:41.4 -->

“What do you think, great king?

<!-- @segment mn82:41.5 -->

Do you reign over the prosperous land of Kuru?”

<!-- @segment mn82:41.6 -->

“Indeed I do.”

<!-- @segment mn82:41.7 -->

“What do you think, great king?

<!-- @segment mn82:41.8 -->

Suppose a trustworthy and dependable man were to come from the east.

<!-- @segment mn82:41.9 -->

He’d approach you and say:

<!-- @segment mn82:41.10 -->

‘Please great king, you should know this. I come from the east.

<!-- @segment mn82:41.11 -->

There I saw a large country that is successful and prosperous, populous, full of people.

<!-- @segment mn82:41.12 -->

They have many divisions of elephants, cavalry, chariots, and infantry.

<!-- @segment mn82:41.13 -->

And there’s plenty of money and grain,

<!-- @segment mn82:41.14 -->

plenty of gold, coined and uncoined, worked and unworked,

<!-- @segment mn82:41.15 -->

and plenty of women for the taking.

<!-- @segment mn82:41.16 -->

With your current forces you can conquer it.

<!-- @segment mn82:41.17 -->

Conquer it, great king!’ What would you do?”

<!-- @segment mn82:41.18 -->

“I would conquer it and reign over it.”

<!-- @segment mn82:41.19 -->

“What do you think, great king?

<!-- @segment mn82:41.20 -->

Suppose a trustworthy and dependable man were to come from the west,

<!-- @segment mn82:41.21 -->

north,

<!-- @segment mn82:41.22 -->

south,

<!-- @segment mn82:41.23 -->

or from over the ocean.

<!-- @segment mn82:41.24 -->

He’d approach you and say the same thing.

<!-- @segment mn82:41.25 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:41.26 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:41.27 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:41.28 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:41.29 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:41.30 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:41.31 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:41.32 -->

What would you do?”

<!-- @segment mn82:41.33 -->

“I would conquer it and reign over it.”

<!-- @segment mn82:41.34 -->

“This is what the Buddha was referring to when he said:

<!-- @segment mn82:41.35 -->

‘The world is wanting, insatiable, the slave of craving.’

<!-- @segment mn82:41.36 -->

And it was after knowing and seeing and hearing this that I went forth from the lay life to homelessness.”

<!-- @segment mn82:41.37 -->

“It’s incredible, worthy Raṭṭhapāla, it’s amazing,

<!-- @segment mn82:41.38 -->

how well said this was by the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn82:41.39 -->



<!-- @segment mn82:41.40 -->

For the world is indeed wanting, insatiable, the slave of craving.”

<!-- @segment mn82:42.1 -->

This is what Venerable Raṭṭhapāla said.

<!-- @segment mn82:42.2 -->

Then he went on to say:

<!-- @segment mn82:42.3 -->

“I see rich humans in the world who,

<!-- @segment mn82:42.4 -->

because of delusion, give not <j>the wealth they’ve earned.

<!-- @segment mn82:42.5 -->

Greedily, they hoard their riches,

<!-- @segment mn82:42.6 -->

yearning for ever more sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment mn82:42.7 -->

A king who conquered the earth by force,

<!-- @segment mn82:42.8 -->

ruling the land from sea to sea,

<!-- @segment mn82:42.9 -->

unsatisfied with the near shore of the ocean,

<!-- @segment mn82:42.10 -->

would still yearn for the further shore.

<!-- @segment mn82:42.11 -->

Not just the king, but others too,

<!-- @segment mn82:42.12 -->

reach death not rid of craving.

<!-- @segment mn82:42.13 -->

They leave the body still wanting,

<!-- @segment mn82:42.14 -->

for in this world sensual pleasures never satisfy.

<!-- @segment mn82:42.15 -->

Relatives lament, their hair disheveled,

<!-- @segment mn82:42.16 -->

saying ‘Ah! Alas! They’re not immortal!’

<!-- @segment mn82:42.17 -->

They take out the body wrapped in a shroud,

<!-- @segment mn82:42.18 -->

heap up a pyre, and burn it there.

<!-- @segment mn82:42.19 -->

It’s poked with stakes while being burnt,

<!-- @segment mn82:42.20 -->

in just a single cloth, all wealth gone.

<!-- @segment mn82:42.21 -->

Relatives, friends, and companions

<!-- @segment mn82:42.22 -->

can’t help you when you’re dying.

<!-- @segment mn82:42.23 -->

Heirs take your riches,

<!-- @segment mn82:42.24 -->

while beings fare on according to their deeds.

<!-- @segment mn82:42.25 -->

Riches don’t follow you when you die;

<!-- @segment mn82:42.26 -->

nor do children, wife, wealth, nor kingdom.

<!-- @segment mn82:42.27 -->

Longevity isn’t gained by riches,

<!-- @segment mn82:42.28 -->

nor does wealth banish old age;

<!-- @segment mn82:42.29 -->

for the attentive say this life is short,

<!-- @segment mn82:42.30 -->

it’s perishable and not eternal.

<!-- @segment mn82:42.31 -->

The rich and the poor feel its touch;

<!-- @segment mn82:42.32 -->

the fool and the attentive one feel it too.

<!-- @segment mn82:42.33 -->

But the fool lies stricken by their own folly,

<!-- @segment mn82:42.34 -->

while the attentive one does not tremble at the touch.

<!-- @segment mn82:42.35 -->

Therefore wisdom’s much better than wealth,

<!-- @segment mn82:42.36 -->

since by wisdom <j>you reach consummation in this life.

<!-- @segment mn82:42.37 -->

But if because of delusion <j>you don’t reach consummation,

<!-- @segment mn82:42.38 -->

you’ll do evil deeds in life after life.

<!-- @segment mn82:42.39 -->

One who enters a womb and the world beyond,

<!-- @segment mn82:42.40 -->

will transmigrate from one life to the next.

<!-- @segment mn82:42.41 -->

While someone of little wisdom, <j>placing faith in them,

<!-- @segment mn82:42.42 -->

also enters a womb and the world beyond.

<!-- @segment mn82:42.43 -->

As a bandit caught in a window

<!-- @segment mn82:42.44 -->

is punished for his own bad deeds;

<!-- @segment mn82:42.45 -->

so after departing, in the world beyond,

<!-- @segment mn82:42.46 -->

people are punished for their own bad deeds.

<!-- @segment mn82:42.47 -->

Sensual pleasures are diverse, sweet, delightful;

<!-- @segment mn82:42.48 -->

appearing in disguise they disturb the mind.

<!-- @segment mn82:42.49 -->

Seeing danger in sensual stimulations,

<!-- @segment mn82:42.50 -->

I went forth, O King.

<!-- @segment mn82:42.51 -->

As fruit falls from a tree, so the sons of Manu fall,

<!-- @segment mn82:42.52 -->

young and old, when the body breaks up.

<!-- @segment mn82:42.53 -->

Seeing this, too, I went forth, O King;

<!-- @segment mn82:42.54 -->

it’s a sure bet that the ascetic life is better.”
