---
slug: mn83
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: About King Maghadeva
---

<!-- @segment mn83:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn83:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Mithilā in the Maghadeva Mango Grove.

<!-- @segment mn83:2.1 -->

Then the Buddha smiled at a certain spot.

<!-- @segment mn83:2.2 -->

Then Venerable Ānanda thought,

<!-- @segment mn83:2.3 -->

“What is the cause, what is the reason why the Buddha smiled?

<!-- @segment mn83:2.4 -->

Realized Ones do not smile for no reason.”

<!-- @segment mn83:2.5 -->

So Ānanda arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his cupped palms toward the Buddha, and said,

<!-- @segment mn83:2.6 -->

“What is the cause, what is the reason why the Buddha smiled?

<!-- @segment mn83:2.7 -->

Realized Ones do not smile for no reason.”

<!-- @segment mn83:3.1 -->

“Once upon a time, Ānanda, right here in Mithilā there was a just and principled king named Maghadeva, a great king who stood by his duty.

<!-- @segment mn83:3.2 -->

He justly treated brahmins and householders, and people of town and country.

<!-- @segment mn83:3.3 -->

And he observed the sabbath on the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth of the fortnight.

<!-- @segment mn83:4.1 -->

Then, after many years, many hundred years, many thousand years had passed, King Maghadeva addressed his barber,

<!-- @segment mn83:4.2 -->

‘My dear barber, when you see grey hairs growing on my head, please tell me.’

<!-- @segment mn83:4.3 -->

‘Yes, Your Majesty,’ replied the barber.

<!-- @segment mn83:4.4 -->

When many thousand years had passed, the barber saw grey hairs growing on the king’s head.

<!-- @segment mn83:4.5 -->

He said to the king,

<!-- @segment mn83:4.6 -->

‘The messengers of the gods have shown themselves to you. Grey hairs can be seen growing on your head.’

<!-- @segment mn83:4.7 -->

‘Well then, my dear barber, carefully pull them out with tweezers and place them in my cupped hands.’

<!-- @segment mn83:4.8 -->

‘Yes, Your Majesty,’ replied the barber, and he did as the king said.

<!-- @segment mn83:4.9 -->

The king gave the barber a prize village, then summoned the crown prince and said,

<!-- @segment mn83:4.10 -->

‘Dear prince, the messengers of the gods have shown themselves to me.

<!-- @segment mn83:4.11 -->

Grey hairs can be seen growing on my head.

<!-- @segment mn83:4.12 -->

I have enjoyed human pleasures.

<!-- @segment mn83:4.13 -->

Now it is time to seek heavenly pleasures.

<!-- @segment mn83:4.14 -->

Come, dear prince, rule the realm.

<!-- @segment mn83:4.15 -->

I shall shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment mn83:4.16 -->

For dear prince, you too will one day see grey hairs growing on your head. When this happens, after giving a prize village to the barber and carefully instructing the crown prince in kingship, you should shave off your hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment mn83:4.17 -->

Keep up this good practice that I have founded. Do not be my final man.

<!-- @segment mn83:4.18 -->

When a pair of men are living, the one who breaks such good practice is their final man.

<!-- @segment mn83:4.19 -->

Therefore I say to you,

<!-- @segment mn83:4.20 -->

“Keep up this good practice that I have founded. Do not be my final man.”’

<!-- @segment mn83:5.1 -->

And so, after giving a prize village to the barber and carefully instructing the crown prince in kingship, King Maghadeva shaved off his hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and went forth from the lay life to homelessness here in this mango grove.

<!-- @segment mn83:5.2 -->

He meditated spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, he spread a heart full of love to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.

<!-- @segment mn83:5.3 -->

He meditated spreading a heart full of compassion …

<!-- @segment mn83:5.4 -->

rejoicing …

<!-- @segment mn83:5.5 -->

equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, he spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.

<!-- @segment mn83:6.1 -->

For 84,000 years King Maghadeva played games as a child, for 84,000 years he acted as viceroy, for 84,000 years he ruled the realm, and for 84,000 years he led the spiritual life after going forth here in this mango grove.

<!-- @segment mn83:6.2 -->

And having developed the four divine meditations, when his body broke up, after death, he was reborn in a good place, a realm of divinity.

<!-- @segment mn83:7.1 -->

Then, after many years, many hundred years, many thousand years had passed, King Maghadeva’s son addressed his barber,

<!-- @segment mn83:7.2 -->

‘My dear barber, when you see grey hairs growing on my head, please tell me.’

<!-- @segment mn83:7.3 -->

And all unfolded as in the case of his father.

<!-- @segment mn83:7.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:7.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:7.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:7.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:7.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:7.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:8.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:8.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:8.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:8.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:8.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:8.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:8.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:8.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:8.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:8.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:8.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:8.12 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:9.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:9.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:9.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:9.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:9.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:9.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:9.7 -->

And having developed the four divine meditations, when his body broke up, after death, Maghadeva’s son was reborn in a good place, a realm of divinity.

<!-- @segment mn83:10.1 -->

And a lineage of 84,000 kings, sons of sons of King Maghadeva, shaved off their hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and went forth from the lay life to homelessness here in this mango grove.

<!-- @segment mn83:10.2 -->

They meditated spreading a heart full of love …

<!-- @segment mn83:11.1 -->

compassion …

<!-- @segment mn83:11.2 -->

rejoicing …

<!-- @segment mn83:11.3 -->

equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.

<!-- @segment mn83:11.4 -->

For 84,000 years they played games as a child, for 84,000 years they acted as viceroy, for 84,000 years they ruled the realm, and for 84,000 years they led the spiritual life after going forth here in this mango grove.

<!-- @segment mn83:11.5 -->

And having developed the four divine meditations, when their bodies broke up, after death, they were reborn in a good place, a realm of divinity.

<!-- @segment mn83:12.1 -->

Nimi was the last of those kings, a just and principled king, a great king who stood by his duty.

<!-- @segment mn83:12.2 -->

He justly treated brahmins and householders, and people of town and country.

<!-- @segment mn83:12.3 -->

And he observed the sabbath on the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth of the fortnight.

<!-- @segment mn83:13.1 -->

Once upon a time, Ānanda, while the gods of the thirty-three were sitting together in the Hall of Clear Right, this discussion came up among them:

<!-- @segment mn83:13.2 -->

‘The people of Videha are so fortunate, so very fortunate

<!-- @segment mn83:13.3 -->

to have Nimi as their king. He is a just and principled king, a great king who stands by his duty.

<!-- @segment mn83:13.4 -->

He justly treats brahmins and householders, and people of town and country.

<!-- @segment mn83:13.5 -->

And he observes the sabbath on the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth of the fortnight.’

<!-- @segment mn83:13.6 -->

Then Sakka, lord of gods, addressed the gods of the thirty-three,

<!-- @segment mn83:13.7 -->

‘Good fellows, would you like to see King Nimi?’

<!-- @segment mn83:13.8 -->

‘We would.’

<!-- @segment mn83:13.9 -->

Now at that time it was the fifteenth day sabbath, and King Nimi had bathed his head and was sitting upstairs in the royal longhouse to observe the sabbath.

<!-- @segment mn83:13.10 -->

Then, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, Sakka vanished from the thirty-three gods and reappeared in front of King Nimi.

<!-- @segment mn83:13.11 -->

He said to the king,

<!-- @segment mn83:13.12 -->

‘You’re fortunate, great king, so very fortunate.

<!-- @segment mn83:13.13 -->

The gods of the thirty-three were sitting together in the Hall of Clear Right, where they were singing your praises.

<!-- @segment mn83:13.14 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:13.15 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:13.16 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:13.17 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:13.18 -->

They would like to see you.

<!-- @segment mn83:13.19 -->

I shall send a chariot harnessed with a thousand thoroughbreds for you, great king.

<!-- @segment mn83:13.20 -->

Mount the heavenly chariot, great king, without wavering!’

<!-- @segment mn83:13.21 -->

King Nimi consented with silence.

<!-- @segment mn83:13.22 -->

Then, knowing that the king had consented, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, Sakka vanished from King Nimi and reappeared among the gods of the thirty-three.

<!-- @segment mn83:14.1 -->

Then Sakka, lord of gods, addressed his chariot handler Mātali,

<!-- @segment mn83:14.2 -->

‘Come, dear Mātali, harness the chariot with a thousand thoroughbreds. Then go to King Nimi and say,

<!-- @segment mn83:14.3 -->

“Great king, this chariot has been sent for you by Sakka, lord of gods.

<!-- @segment mn83:14.4 -->

Mount the heavenly chariot, great king, without wavering!”’

<!-- @segment mn83:14.5 -->

‘Yes, lord,’ replied Mātali. He did as Sakka asked, and said to the king,

<!-- @segment mn83:14.6 -->

‘Great king, this chariot has been sent for you by Sakka, lord of gods.

<!-- @segment mn83:14.7 -->

Mount the heavenly chariot, great king, without wavering!

<!-- @segment mn83:14.8 -->

But which way should we go—the way of those who experience the result of bad deeds, or the way of those who experience the result of good deeds?’

<!-- @segment mn83:14.9 -->

‘Take me both ways, Mātali.’

<!-- @segment mn83:15.1 -->

Mātali brought King Nimi to the Hall of Clear Right.

<!-- @segment mn83:15.2 -->

Sakka saw King Nimi coming off in the distance,

<!-- @segment mn83:15.3 -->

and said to him:

<!-- @segment mn83:15.4 -->

‘Come, great king!

<!-- @segment mn83:15.5 -->

Welcome, great king!

<!-- @segment mn83:15.6 -->

The gods of the thirty-three who wanted to see you were sitting together in the Hall of Clear Right, where they were singing your praises.

<!-- @segment mn83:15.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:15.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:15.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:15.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:15.11 -->

The gods of the thirty-three would like to see you.

<!-- @segment mn83:15.12 -->

Enjoy heavenly glory among the gods!’

<!-- @segment mn83:15.13 -->

‘Enough, good fellow. Send me back to Mithilā right away.

<!-- @segment mn83:15.14 -->

That way I shall justly treat brahmins and householders, and people of town and country.

<!-- @segment mn83:15.15 -->

And I shall observe the sabbath on the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth of the fortnight.’

<!-- @segment mn83:16.1 -->

Then Sakka, lord of gods, addressed his chariot handler Mātali,

<!-- @segment mn83:16.2 -->

‘Come, dear Mātali, harness the chariot with a thousand thoroughbreds and send King Nimi back to Mithilā right away.’

<!-- @segment mn83:16.3 -->

‘Yes, lord,’ replied Mātali, and did as Sakka asked.

<!-- @segment mn83:16.4 -->

And there King Nimi justly treated his people, and observed the sabbath.

<!-- @segment mn83:16.5 -->

Then, after many years, many hundred years, many thousand years had passed, King Nimi addressed his barber,

<!-- @segment mn83:16.6 -->

‘My dear barber, when you see grey hairs growing on my head, please tell me.’

<!-- @segment mn83:16.7 -->

And all unfolded as before.

<!-- @segment mn83:16.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:16.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:16.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:16.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:16.12 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:16.13 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:16.14 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:16.15 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:16.16 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:16.17 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:16.18 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:16.19 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:16.20 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:16.21 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:16.22 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:16.23 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:16.24 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:16.25 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:17-19.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:17-19.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:17-19.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:17-19.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:17-19.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:17-19.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn83:17-19.7 -->

And having developed the four divine meditations, when his body broke up, after death, King Nimi was reborn in a good place, a realm of divinity.

<!-- @segment mn83:20.1 -->

But King Nimi had a son named Kaḷāra Janaka.

<!-- @segment mn83:20.2 -->

He didn’t go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment mn83:20.3 -->

He broke that good practice.

<!-- @segment mn83:20.4 -->

He was their final man.

<!-- @segment mn83:21.1 -->

Ānanda, you might think,

<!-- @segment mn83:21.2 -->

‘Surely King Maghadeva, by whom that good practice was founded, must have been someone else at that time?’

<!-- @segment mn83:21.3 -->

But you should not see it like this.

<!-- @segment mn83:21.4 -->

I myself was King Maghadeva at that time.

<!-- @segment mn83:21.5 -->

I was the one who founded that good practice,

<!-- @segment mn83:21.6 -->

which was kept up by those who came after.

<!-- @segment mn83:21.7 -->

But that good practice doesn’t lead to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. It only leads as far as rebirth in the realm of divinity.

<!-- @segment mn83:21.8 -->

But now I have founded a good practice that does lead to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.

<!-- @segment mn83:21.9 -->

And what is that good practice?

<!-- @segment mn83:21.10 -->

It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:

<!-- @segment mn83:21.11 -->

right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

<!-- @segment mn83:21.12 -->

This is the good practice I have now founded that leads to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.

<!-- @segment mn83:21.13 -->

Ānanda, I say to you:

<!-- @segment mn83:21.14 -->

‘You all should keep up this good practice that I have founded. Do not be my final men.’

<!-- @segment mn83:21.15 -->

When a pair of men are living, the one who breaks such good practice is their final man.

<!-- @segment mn83:21.16 -->

Ānanda, I say to you:

<!-- @segment mn83:21.17 -->

‘You all should keep up this good practice that I have founded. Do not be my final men.’”

<!-- @segment mn83:21.18 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn83:21.19 -->

Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what the Buddha said.
