---
slug: mn86
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Aṅgulimāla
description: The Buddha walks alone toward the murderer Aṅgulimāla, who pursues him but cannot catch him; through the stop teaching, Aṅgulimāla renounces violence, receives ordination, and eventually becomes awakened.
qualities: harm, ethical conduct, faith, liberation, compassion
theme: inspiration, story
---

<!-- @segment mn86:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn86:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment mn86:2.1 -->

Now at that time in the realm of King Pasenadi of Kosala there was a bandit named Aṅgulimāla. He was violent, bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to living beings.

<!-- @segment mn86:2.2 -->

He laid waste to villages, towns, and countries.

<!-- @segment mn86:2.3 -->

He was constantly murdering humans, and he wore their fingers as a necklace.

<!-- @segment mn86:3.1 -->

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms.

<!-- @segment mn86:3.2 -->

Then, after the meal, on his return from almsround, he set his lodgings in order and, taking his bowl and robe, he walked down the road that led to Aṅgulimāla.

<!-- @segment mn86:3.3 -->

The cowherds, shepherds, farmers, and travelers saw him on the road,

<!-- @segment mn86:3.4 -->

and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn86:3.5 -->

“Don’t take this road, ascetic.

<!-- @segment mn86:3.6 -->

On this road there is a bandit named Aṅgulimāla. He is violent, bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to living beings.

<!-- @segment mn86:3.7 -->

He has laid waste to villages, towns, and countries.

<!-- @segment mn86:3.8 -->

He is constantly murdering humans, and he wears their fingers as a necklace.

<!-- @segment mn86:3.9 -->

People travel along this road only after banding closely together in groups of ten, twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty.

<!-- @segment mn86:3.10 -->

Still they meet their end by Aṅgulimāla’s hand.”

<!-- @segment mn86:3.11 -->

But when they said this, the Buddha went on in silence.

<!-- @segment mn86:3.12 -->

For a second time …

<!-- @segment mn86:3.13 -->

and a third time, they urged the Buddha to turn back.

<!-- @segment mn86:3.14 -->



<!-- @segment mn86:3.15 -->



<!-- @segment mn86:3.16 -->



<!-- @segment mn86:3.17 -->



<!-- @segment mn86:4.1 -->

But when they said this, the Buddha went on in silence.

<!-- @segment mn86:4.2 -->

The bandit Aṅgulimāla saw the Buddha coming off in the distance,

<!-- @segment mn86:4.3 -->

and thought,

<!-- @segment mn86:4.4 -->

“Oh lord, how incredible, how amazing!

<!-- @segment mn86:4.5 -->

People travel along this road only after banding closely together in groups of ten, twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty.

<!-- @segment mn86:4.6 -->

Still they meet their end by my hand.

<!-- @segment mn86:4.7 -->

But still this ascetic comes along alone and unaccompanied, like a conqueror.

<!-- @segment mn86:4.8 -->

Why don’t I take his life?”

<!-- @segment mn86:5.1 -->

Then Aṅgulimāla donned his sword and shield, fastened his bow and arrows, and followed behind the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn86:5.2 -->

But the Buddha used his psychic power to will that Aṅgulimāla could not catch up with him no matter how hard he tried, even though the Buddha kept walking at a normal speed.

<!-- @segment mn86:5.3 -->

Then Aṅgulimāla thought,

<!-- @segment mn86:5.4 -->

“Oh lord, how incredible, how amazing!

<!-- @segment mn86:5.5 -->

Previously, even when I’ve chased a speeding elephant, horse, chariot or deer, I’ve always caught up with them.

<!-- @segment mn86:5.6 -->

But I can’t catch up with this ascetic no matter how hard I try, even though he’s walking at a normal speed.”

<!-- @segment mn86:5.7 -->

He stood still and said,

<!-- @segment mn86:5.8 -->

“Stop, stop, ascetic!”

<!-- @segment mn86:5.9 -->

“I’ve stopped, Aṅgulimāla—now you stop.”

<!-- @segment mn86:5.10 -->

Then Aṅgulimāla thought,

<!-- @segment mn86:5.11 -->

“These ascetics who follow the Sakyan speak the truth.

<!-- @segment mn86:5.12 -->

Yet while walking the ascetic Gotama says:

<!-- @segment mn86:5.13 -->

‘I’ve stopped, Aṅgulimāla—now you stop.’

<!-- @segment mn86:5.14 -->

Why don’t I ask him about this?”

<!-- @segment mn86:6.1 -->

Then he addressed the Buddha in verse:

<!-- @segment mn86:6.2 -->

“While walking, ascetic, you say ‘I’ve stopped.’

<!-- @segment mn86:6.3 -->

And I have stopped, but you tell me I’ve not.

<!-- @segment mn86:6.4 -->

I’m asking you this, ascetic:

<!-- @segment mn86:6.5 -->

how is it you’ve stopped and I have not?”

<!-- @segment mn86:6.6 -->

“Aṅgulimāla, I have forever stopped—

<!-- @segment mn86:6.7 -->

I’ve laid aside violence towards all creatures.

<!-- @segment mn86:6.8 -->

But you can’t stop yourself <j>from harming living creatures;

<!-- @segment mn86:6.9 -->

that’s why I’ve stopped, but you have not.”

<!-- @segment mn86:6.10 -->

“Oh, at long last a renowned great seer,

<!-- @segment mn86:6.11 -->

an ascetic has followed me into this deep wood.

<!-- @segment mn86:6.12 -->

Now that I’ve heard your verse on Dhamma,

<!-- @segment mn86:6.13 -->

I shall live without evil.”

<!-- @segment mn86:6.14 -->

With these words, <j>the bandit hurled his sword and weapons

<!-- @segment mn86:6.15 -->

down a cliff into an abyss.

<!-- @segment mn86:6.16 -->

He venerated the Holy One’s feet,

<!-- @segment mn86:6.17 -->

and asked him for the going forth right away.

<!-- @segment mn86:6.18 -->

Then the Buddha, the compassionate great seer,

<!-- @segment mn86:6.19 -->

the teacher of the world with its gods,

<!-- @segment mn86:6.20 -->

said to him, “Come, monk!”

<!-- @segment mn86:6.21 -->

And with that he became a monk.

<!-- @segment mn86:7.1 -->

Then the Buddha set out for Sāvatthī with Venerable Aṅgulimāla as his second monk.

<!-- @segment mn86:7.2 -->

Traveling stage by stage, he arrived at Sāvatthī,

<!-- @segment mn86:7.3 -->

where he stayed in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment mn86:8.1 -->

Now at that time a crowd had gathered by the gate of King Pasenadi’s royal compound making a colossal racket,

<!-- @segment mn86:8.2 -->

“In your realm, Your Majesty, there is a bandit named Aṅgulimāla. He is violent, bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to living beings.

<!-- @segment mn86:8.3 -->

He has laid waste to villages, towns, and countries.

<!-- @segment mn86:8.4 -->

He is constantly murdering humans, and he wears their fingers as a necklace.

<!-- @segment mn86:8.5 -->

Your Majesty must put a stop to him!”

<!-- @segment mn86:9.1 -->

Then King Pasenadi drove out from Sāvatthī in the middle of the day with around five hundred horses,

<!-- @segment mn86:9.2 -->

heading for the monastery.

<!-- @segment mn86:9.3 -->

He went by carriage as far as the terrain allowed, then descended and approached the Buddha on foot. He bowed and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him,

<!-- @segment mn86:9.4 -->

“What is it, great king? Is King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha angry with you, or the Licchavis of Vesālī, or some other opposing ruler?”

<!-- @segment mn86:10.1 -->

“No, sir.

<!-- @segment mn86:10.2 -->

In my realm there is a bandit named Aṅgulimāla. He is violent, bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to living beings. …

<!-- @segment mn86:10.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn86:10.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn86:10.5 -->

I shall put a stop to him.”

<!-- @segment mn86:11.1 -->

“But great king, suppose you were to see that Aṅgulimāla had shaved off his hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and gone forth from the lay life to homelessness. And that he was refraining from killing living creatures, stealing, and lying; that he was eating in one part of the day, and was chaste, ethical, and of good character. What would you do to him?”

<!-- @segment mn86:11.2 -->

“I would bow to him, rise in his presence, or offer him a seat. I’d invite him to accept robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. And I’d organize his lawful guarding and protection.

<!-- @segment mn86:11.3 -->

But sir, how could such an immoral, evil man ever have such virtue and restraint?”

<!-- @segment mn86:12.1 -->

Now at that time Venerable Aṅgulimāla was sitting not far from the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn86:12.2 -->

Then the Buddha pointed with his right arm and said to the king,

<!-- @segment mn86:12.3 -->

“Great king, this is Aṅgulimāla.”

<!-- @segment mn86:12.4 -->

Then the king became frightened, scared, his hair standing on end.

<!-- @segment mn86:12.5 -->

Knowing this, the Buddha said to him,

<!-- @segment mn86:12.6 -->

“Do not fear, great king. You have nothing to fear from him.”

<!-- @segment mn86:12.7 -->

Then the king’s fear died down.

<!-- @segment mn86:12.8 -->

Then the king went over to Aṅgulimāla and said,

<!-- @segment mn86:12.9 -->

“Sir, is the master really Aṅgulimāla?”

<!-- @segment mn86:12.10 -->

“Yes, great king.”

<!-- @segment mn86:12.11 -->

“What clans were your father and mother from?”

<!-- @segment mn86:12.12 -->

“My father was a Gagga, and my mother a Mantāṇī.”

<!-- @segment mn86:12.13 -->

“Sir, may Master Gagga son of Mantāṇī be happy.

<!-- @segment mn86:12.14 -->

I’ll make sure that you’re provided with robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.”

<!-- @segment mn86:13.1 -->

But at that time Venerable Aṅgulimāla lived in the wilderness, ate only almsfood, and owned just three robes.

<!-- @segment mn86:13.2 -->

So he said to the king,

<!-- @segment mn86:13.3 -->

“Enough, great king. My robes are complete.”

<!-- @segment mn86:13.4 -->

Then the king went back to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn86:13.5 -->

“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing!

<!-- @segment mn86:13.6 -->

How the Buddha tames those who are wild, pacifies those who are violent, and extinguishes those who are unquenched!

<!-- @segment mn86:13.7 -->

For I was not able to tame him with the rod and the sword, but the Buddha tamed him without rod or sword.

<!-- @segment mn86:13.8 -->

Well, now, sir, I must go.

<!-- @segment mn86:13.9 -->

I have many duties, and much to do.”

<!-- @segment mn86:13.10 -->

“Please, great king, go at your convenience.”

<!-- @segment mn86:13.11 -->

Then King Pasenadi rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

<!-- @segment mn86:14.1 -->

Then Venerable Aṅgulimāla robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms.

<!-- @segment mn86:14.2 -->

Then as he was wandering indiscriminately for almsfood he saw a woman undergoing a distressing obstructed labor.

<!-- @segment mn86:14.3 -->

Seeing this, it occurred to him,

<!-- @segment mn86:14.4 -->

“Oh, beings undergo such travail!

<!-- @segment mn86:14.5 -->

Oh, beings undergo such travail!”

<!-- @segment mn86:14.6 -->

Then after wandering for alms in Sāvatthī, after the meal, on his return from almsround, he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. The Buddha said to him,

<!-- @segment mn86:14.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn86:14.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn86:14.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn86:14.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn86:15.1 -->

“Well then, Aṅgulimāla, go to that woman and say this:

<!-- @segment mn86:15.2 -->

‘Ever since I was born, sister, I don’t recall having intentionally taken the life of a living creature. By this truth, may both you and your baby be safe.’”

<!-- @segment mn86:15.3 -->

“But sir, wouldn’t that be telling a deliberate lie?

<!-- @segment mn86:15.4 -->

For I have intentionally killed many living creatures.”

<!-- @segment mn86:15.5 -->

“In that case, Aṅgulimāla, go to that woman and say this:

<!-- @segment mn86:15.6 -->

‘Ever since I was born in the noble birth, sister, I don’t recall having intentionally taken the life of a living creature. By this truth, may both you and your baby be safe.’”

<!-- @segment mn86:15.7 -->

“Yes, sir,” replied Aṅgulimāla. He went to that woman and said:

<!-- @segment mn86:15.8 -->

“Ever since I was born in the noble birth, sister, I don’t recall having intentionally taken the life of a living creature. By this truth, may both you and your baby be safe.”

<!-- @segment mn86:15.9 -->

Then that woman was safe, and so was her baby.

<!-- @segment mn86:16.1 -->

Then Aṅgulimāla, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment mn86:16.2 -->

He understood: “Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further for this place.”

<!-- @segment mn86:16.3 -->

And Venerable Aṅgulimāla became one of the perfected.

<!-- @segment mn86:17.1 -->

Then Venerable Aṅgulimāla robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms.

<!-- @segment mn86:17.2 -->

Now at that time someone threw a stone that hit Aṅgulimāla, someone else threw a stick, and someone else threw gravel.

<!-- @segment mn86:17.3 -->

Then Aṅgulimāla—with cracked head, bleeding, his bowl broken, and his outer robe torn—went to the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn86:17.4 -->

The Buddha saw him coming off in the distance,

<!-- @segment mn86:17.5 -->

and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn86:17.6 -->

“Endure it, brahmin! Endure it, brahmin!

<!-- @segment mn86:17.7 -->

You’re experiencing in this very life the result of deeds that might have caused you to be tormented in hell for many years, many hundreds or thousands of years.”

<!-- @segment mn86:18.1 -->

Later, Venerable Aṅgulimāla was experiencing the bliss of release while in private retreat.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.2 -->

On that occasion he expressed this heartfelt sentiment:

<!-- @segment mn86:18.3 -->

“He who once was heedless,

<!-- @segment mn86:18.4 -->

but turned to heedfulness,

<!-- @segment mn86:18.5 -->

lights up the world,

<!-- @segment mn86:18.6 -->

like the moon freed from clouds.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.7 -->

Someone whose bad deed

<!-- @segment mn86:18.8 -->

is supplanted by the good,

<!-- @segment mn86:18.9 -->

lights up the world,

<!-- @segment mn86:18.10 -->

like the moon freed from clouds.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.11 -->

A young mendicant

<!-- @segment mn86:18.12 -->

devoted to the Buddha’s teaching,

<!-- @segment mn86:18.13 -->

lights up the world,

<!-- @segment mn86:18.14 -->

like the moon freed from clouds.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.15 -->

May even my enemies <j>hear a Dhamma talk!

<!-- @segment mn86:18.16 -->

May even my enemies <j>devote themselves to the Buddha’s teaching!

<!-- @segment mn86:18.17 -->

May even my enemies associate with those good men

<!-- @segment mn86:18.18 -->

who establish others in the Dhamma!

<!-- @segment mn86:18.19 -->

May even my enemies <j>hear Dhamma at the right time,

<!-- @segment mn86:18.20 -->

from those who teach acceptance,

<!-- @segment mn86:18.21 -->

praising acquiescence;

<!-- @segment mn86:18.22 -->

and may they follow that path!

<!-- @segment mn86:18.23 -->

For then they’d never wish harm

<!-- @segment mn86:18.24 -->

upon myself or others.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.25 -->

Having arrived at ultimate peace,

<!-- @segment mn86:18.26 -->

they’d look after creatures firm and frail.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.27 -->

For irrigators guide the water,

<!-- @segment mn86:18.28 -->

and fletchers straighten arrows;

<!-- @segment mn86:18.29 -->

carpenters carve timber—

<!-- @segment mn86:18.30 -->

but the astute tame themselves.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.31 -->

Some tame by using the rod,

<!-- @segment mn86:18.32 -->

some with goads, and some with whips.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.33 -->

But the unaffected one tamed me

<!-- @segment mn86:18.34 -->

without rod or sword.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.35 -->

My name is ‘Harmless’,

<!-- @segment mn86:18.36 -->

though I used to be harmful.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.37 -->

The name I bear today is true,

<!-- @segment mn86:18.38 -->

for I do no harm to anyone.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.39 -->

I used to be a bandit,

<!-- @segment mn86:18.40 -->

the notorious Aṅgulimāla.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.41 -->

Swept away in a great flood,

<!-- @segment mn86:18.42 -->

I went to the Buddha as a refuge.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.43 -->

I used to have blood on my hands,

<!-- @segment mn86:18.44 -->

the notorious Aṅgulimāla.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.45 -->

See the refuge I’ve found—

<!-- @segment mn86:18.46 -->

the leash to existence is eradicated.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.47 -->

I’ve done many of the sort of deeds

<!-- @segment mn86:18.48 -->

that lead to a bad destination.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.49 -->

The result of my deeds has already struck me,

<!-- @segment mn86:18.50 -->

so I enjoy my food free of debt.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.51 -->

Fools and simpletons

<!-- @segment mn86:18.52 -->

devote themselves to negligence.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.53 -->

But the wise protect diligence

<!-- @segment mn86:18.54 -->

as their best treasure.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.55 -->

Don’t devote yourself to negligence,

<!-- @segment mn86:18.56 -->

or delight in erotic intimacy.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.57 -->

For if you’re diligent and practice absorption,

<!-- @segment mn86:18.58 -->

you’ll attain abundant happiness.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.59 -->

It was welcome, not unwelcome,

<!-- @segment mn86:18.60 -->

the advice I got was good.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.61 -->

Of the well-explained teachings,

<!-- @segment mn86:18.62 -->

I arrived at the best.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.63 -->

It was welcome, not unwelcome,

<!-- @segment mn86:18.64 -->

the advice I got was good.

<!-- @segment mn86:18.65 -->

I’ve attained the three knowledges

<!-- @segment mn86:18.66 -->

and fulfilled the Buddha’s instructions.”
