---
slug: mn87
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Born From the Beloved
---

<!-- @segment mn87:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn87:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment mn87:2.1 -->

Now at that time a certain householder’s dear and beloved only child passed away.

<!-- @segment mn87:2.2 -->

After their death he didn’t feel like working or eating.

<!-- @segment mn87:2.3 -->

He would go to the cremation ground and wail,

<!-- @segment mn87:2.4 -->

“Where are you, my only child? Where are you, my only child?”

<!-- @segment mn87:3.1 -->

Then he went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him,

<!-- @segment mn87:3.2 -->

“Your faculties, householder, are those of one who is unstable in their own mind; there is a deterioration in your faculties.”

<!-- @segment mn87:3.3 -->

“And how, sir, could there be no deterioration of my faculties?

<!-- @segment mn87:3.4 -->

For my dear and beloved only child has passed away.

<!-- @segment mn87:3.5 -->

Since their death I haven’t felt like working or eating.

<!-- @segment mn87:3.6 -->

I go to the cremation ground and wail:

<!-- @segment mn87:3.7 -->

‘Where are you, my only child? Where are you, my only child?’”

<!-- @segment mn87:3.8 -->

“That’s so true, householder! That’s so true, householder!

<!-- @segment mn87:3.9 -->

For our loved ones are a source of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.”

<!-- @segment mn87:3.10 -->

“Sir, who on earth could ever think such a thing!

<!-- @segment mn87:3.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:3.12 -->

For our loved ones are a source of joy and happiness.”

<!-- @segment mn87:3.13 -->

Disagreeing with the Buddha’s statement, rejecting it, he rose from his seat and left.

<!-- @segment mn87:4.1 -->

Now at that time several gamblers were playing dice not far from the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn87:4.2 -->

That householder approached them and told them what had happened.

<!-- @segment mn87:4.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:4.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:4.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:4.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:4.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:4.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:4.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:4.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:4.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:4.12 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:4.13 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:4.14 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:4.15 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:4.16 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:4.17 -->

“That’s so true, householder! That’s so true, householder!

<!-- @segment mn87:4.18 -->

For our loved ones are a source of joy and happiness.”

<!-- @segment mn87:4.19 -->

Thinking, “The gamblers and I are in agreement,” the householder left.

<!-- @segment mn87:5.1 -->

Eventually that topic of discussion reached the royal compound.

<!-- @segment mn87:5.2 -->

Then King Pasenadi addressed Queen Mallikā,

<!-- @segment mn87:5.3 -->

“Mallika, your ascetic Gotama said this:

<!-- @segment mn87:5.4 -->

‘Our loved ones are a source of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.’”

<!-- @segment mn87:5.5 -->

“If that’s what the Buddha said, great king, then that’s how it is.”

<!-- @segment mn87:5.6 -->

“No matter what the ascetic Gotama says, Mallikā agrees with him:

<!-- @segment mn87:5.7 -->

‘If that’s what the Buddha said, great king, then that’s how it is.’

<!-- @segment mn87:5.8 -->

You’re just like a pupil who agrees with everything their tutor says.

<!-- @segment mn87:5.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:5.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:5.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:5.12 -->

Go away, Mallikā, get out of here!”

<!-- @segment mn87:6.1 -->

Then Queen Mallikā addressed the brahmin Nāḷijaṅgha,

<!-- @segment mn87:6.2 -->

“Please, brahmin, go to the Buddha, and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Ask him if he is healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably.

<!-- @segment mn87:6.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:6.4 -->

And then say:

<!-- @segment mn87:6.5 -->

‘Sir, did the Buddha make this statement:

<!-- @segment mn87:6.6 -->

“Our loved ones are a source of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress”?’

<!-- @segment mn87:6.7 -->

Remember well how the Buddha answers and tell it to me.

<!-- @segment mn87:6.8 -->

For Realized Ones say nothing that is not so.”

<!-- @segment mn87:6.9 -->

“Yes, ma’am,” he replied. He went to the Buddha and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment mn87:6.10 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn87:6.11 -->

“Worthy Gotama, Queen Mallikā bows with her head to your feet. She asks if you are healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably.

<!-- @segment mn87:6.12 -->

And she asks whether

<!-- @segment mn87:6.13 -->

the Buddha made this statement:

<!-- @segment mn87:6.14 -->

‘Our loved ones are a source of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.’”

<!-- @segment mn87:7.1 -->

“That’s right, brahmin, that’s right!

<!-- @segment mn87:7.2 -->

For our loved ones are a source of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

<!-- @segment mn87:8.1 -->

And here’s a way to understand how our loved ones are a source of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

<!-- @segment mn87:8.2 -->

Once upon a time right here in Sāvatthī a certain woman’s mother passed away.

<!-- @segment mn87:8.3 -->

And because of that she went mad and lost her mind. She went from street to street and from square to square saying,

<!-- @segment mn87:8.4 -->

‘Has anyone seen my mother? Has anyone seen my mother?’

<!-- @segment mn87:9-14.1 -->

And here’s another way to understand how our loved ones are a source of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

<!-- @segment mn87:9-14.2 -->

Once upon a time right here in Sāvatthī a certain woman’s father …

<!-- @segment mn87:9-14.3 -->

brother …

<!-- @segment mn87:9-14.4 -->

sister …

<!-- @segment mn87:9-14.5 -->

son …

<!-- @segment mn87:9-14.6 -->

daughter …

<!-- @segment mn87:9-14.7 -->

husband passed away.

<!-- @segment mn87:9-14.8 -->

And because of that she went mad and lost her mind. She went from street to street and from square to square saying,

<!-- @segment mn87:9-14.9 -->

‘Has anyone seen my husband? Has anyone seen my husband?’

<!-- @segment mn87:15-21.1 -->

And here’s another way to understand how our loved ones are a source of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

<!-- @segment mn87:15-21.2 -->

Once upon a time right here in Sāvatthī a certain man’s mother …

<!-- @segment mn87:15-21.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:15-21.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:15-21.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:15-21.6 -->

father …

<!-- @segment mn87:15-21.7 -->

brother …

<!-- @segment mn87:15-21.8 -->

sister …

<!-- @segment mn87:15-21.9 -->

son …

<!-- @segment mn87:15-21.10 -->

daughter …

<!-- @segment mn87:15-21.11 -->

wife passed away.

<!-- @segment mn87:15-21.12 -->

And because of that he went mad and lost his mind. He went from street to street and from square to square saying,

<!-- @segment mn87:15-21.13 -->

‘Has anyone seen my wife? Has anyone seen my wife?’

<!-- @segment mn87:15-21.14 -->

And here’s another way to understand how our loved ones are a source of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

<!-- @segment mn87:22.1 -->

Once upon a time right here in Sāvatthī a certain woman went to live with her relative’s family.

<!-- @segment mn87:22.2 -->

But her relatives wanted to divorce her from her husband and give her to another,

<!-- @segment mn87:22.3 -->

who she didn’t want.

<!-- @segment mn87:22.4 -->

So she told her husband about this.

<!-- @segment mn87:22.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:22.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:22.7 -->

But he cut her in two and disemboweled himself, thinking,

<!-- @segment mn87:22.8 -->

‘We shall be together after death.’

<!-- @segment mn87:22.9 -->

That’s another way to understand how our loved ones are a source of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.”

<!-- @segment mn87:23.1 -->

Then Nāḷijaṅgha the brahmin, having approved and agreed with what the Buddha said, rose from his seat, went to Queen Mallikā, and told her of all they had discussed. Then Queen Mallikā approached King Pasenadi and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn87:24.1 -->

“What do you think, great king?

<!-- @segment mn87:24.2 -->

Do you love Princess Vajirī?”

<!-- @segment mn87:24.3 -->

“Indeed I do, Mallikā.”

<!-- @segment mn87:24.4 -->

“What do you think, great king?

<!-- @segment mn87:24.5 -->

If she were to decay and perish, would sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress arise in you?”

<!-- @segment mn87:24.6 -->

“If she were to decay and perish, my life would fall apart. How could sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress not arise in me?”

<!-- @segment mn87:24.7 -->

“This is what the Buddha was referring to when he said:

<!-- @segment mn87:24.8 -->

‘Our loved ones are a source of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.’

<!-- @segment mn87:25.1 -->

What do you think, great king?

<!-- @segment mn87:25.2 -->

Do you love Queen Vāsabhā? …

<!-- @segment mn87:25.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:25.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:25.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:25.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:25.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:26.1 -->

Do you love your son, General Viḍūḍabha? …

<!-- @segment mn87:26.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:26.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:26.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:26.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:26.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn87:27.1 -->

Do you love me?”

<!-- @segment mn87:27.2 -->

“Indeed I do love you, Mallikā.”

<!-- @segment mn87:27.3 -->

“What do you think, great king?

<!-- @segment mn87:27.4 -->

If I were to decay and perish, would sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress arise in you?”

<!-- @segment mn87:27.5 -->

“If you were to decay and perish, my life would fall apart. How could sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress not arise in me?”

<!-- @segment mn87:27.6 -->

“This is what the Buddha was referring to when he said:

<!-- @segment mn87:27.7 -->

‘Our loved ones are a source of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.’

<!-- @segment mn87:28.1 -->

What do you think, great king?

<!-- @segment mn87:28.2 -->

Do you love the realms of Kāsi and Kosala?”

<!-- @segment mn87:28.3 -->

“Indeed I do, Mallikā.

<!-- @segment mn87:28.4 -->

It’s due to the bounty of Kāsi and Kosala that we use sandalwood imported from Kāsi and wear garlands, fragrance, and makeup.”

<!-- @segment mn87:28.5 -->

“What do you think, great king?

<!-- @segment mn87:28.6 -->

If these realms were to decay and perish, would sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress arise in you?”

<!-- @segment mn87:28.7 -->

“If they were to decay and perish, my life would fall apart. How could sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress not arise in me?”

<!-- @segment mn87:28.8 -->

“This is what the Buddha was referring to when he said:

<!-- @segment mn87:28.9 -->

‘Our loved ones are a source of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.’”

<!-- @segment mn87:29.1 -->

“It’s incredible, Mallikā, it’s amazing,

<!-- @segment mn87:29.2 -->

how far the Buddha sees with penetrating wisdom, it seems to me.

<!-- @segment mn87:29.3 -->

Come, Mallikā, rinse my hands.”

<!-- @segment mn87:29.4 -->

Then King Pasenadi rose from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his cupped palms toward the Buddha, and expressed this heartfelt sentiment three times:

<!-- @segment mn87:29.5 -->

“Homage to him, the blessed one, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha!

<!-- @segment mn87:29.6 -->

Homage to him, the blessed one, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha!

<!-- @segment mn87:29.7 -->

Homage to him, the blessed one, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha!”
