---
slug: mn88
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Imported Cloth
---

<!-- @segment mn88:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn88:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment mn88:2.1 -->

Then Venerable Ānanda robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms.

<!-- @segment mn88:2.2 -->

He wandered for alms in Sāvatthī. After the meal, on his return from almsround, he went to the Eastern Monastery, the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother, for the day’s meditation.

<!-- @segment mn88:3.1 -->

Now at that time King Pasenadi of Kosala mounted the Single Lotus Elephant and drove out from Sāvatthī in the middle of the day.

<!-- @segment mn88:3.2 -->

He saw Ānanda coming off in the distance

<!-- @segment mn88:3.3 -->

and said to the chief minister Sirivaḍḍha,

<!-- @segment mn88:3.4 -->

“My dear Sirivaḍḍha, isn’t that Venerable Ānanda?”

<!-- @segment mn88:3.5 -->

“Indeed it is, great king.”

<!-- @segment mn88:4.1 -->

Then King Pasenadi addressed a man,

<!-- @segment mn88:4.2 -->

“Please, my man, go to Venerable Ānanda, and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Say to him:

<!-- @segment mn88:4.3 -->

‘Sir, King Pasenadi of Kosala bows with his head at your feet.’

<!-- @segment mn88:4.4 -->

And then say:

<!-- @segment mn88:4.5 -->

‘Sir, if you have no urgent business, please wait a while out of sympathy.’”

<!-- @segment mn88:5.1 -->

“Yes, Your Majesty,” that man replied. He did as the king asked.

<!-- @segment mn88:5.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn88:5.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn88:5.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn88:6.1 -->

Ānanda consented with silence.

<!-- @segment mn88:6.2 -->

Then King Pasenadi rode on the elephant as far as the terrain allowed, then descended and approached Ānanda on foot. He bowed, stood to one side, and said to Ānanda,

<!-- @segment mn88:6.3 -->

“Sir, if you have no urgent business, it would be nice of you to go to the bank of the Aciravatī river out of sympathy.”

<!-- @segment mn88:7.1 -->

Ānanda consented with silence.

<!-- @segment mn88:7.2 -->

He went to the river bank and sat at the root of a certain tree on a seat spread out.

<!-- @segment mn88:7.3 -->

Then King Pasenadi rode on the elephant as far as the terrain allowed, then descended and approached Ānanda on foot. He bowed, stood to one side, and said to Ānanda,

<!-- @segment mn88:7.4 -->

“Here, Venerable Ānanda, sit on this elephant rug.”

<!-- @segment mn88:7.5 -->

“Enough, great king,

<!-- @segment mn88:7.6 -->

you sit on it.

<!-- @segment mn88:7.7 -->

I’m sitting on my own seat.”

<!-- @segment mn88:8.1 -->

So the king sat down on the seat spread out,

<!-- @segment mn88:8.2 -->

and said,

<!-- @segment mn88:8.3 -->

“Honorable Ānanda, would the Buddha engage in the sort of behavior—by way of body, speech, or mind—that is faulted by ascetics and brahmins?”

<!-- @segment mn88:8.4 -->

“No, great king, the Buddha would not engage in the sort of behavior that is faulted by sensible ascetics and brahmins.”

<!-- @segment mn88:8.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn88:8.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn88:8.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn88:9.1 -->

“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing!

<!-- @segment mn88:9.2 -->

For I couldn’t fully express the question, but Venerable Ānanda’s answer completed it for me.

<!-- @segment mn88:9.3 -->

I don’t believe that praise or criticism of others spoken by incompetent fools, without examining or scrutinizing, is the most important thing.

<!-- @segment mn88:9.4 -->

Rather, I believe that praise or criticism of others spoken by competent and intelligent people after examining and scrutinizing is the most important thing.

<!-- @segment mn88:10.1 -->

But Honorable Ānanda, what kind of bodily behavior is faulted by sensible ascetics and brahmins?”

<!-- @segment mn88:10.2 -->

“Unskillful behavior.”

<!-- @segment mn88:10.3 -->

“But what kind of bodily behavior is unskillful?”

<!-- @segment mn88:10.4 -->

“Blameworthy behavior.”

<!-- @segment mn88:10.5 -->

“But what kind of bodily behavior is blameworthy?”

<!-- @segment mn88:10.6 -->

“Hurtful behavior.”

<!-- @segment mn88:10.7 -->

“But what kind of bodily behavior is hurtful?”

<!-- @segment mn88:10.8 -->

“Behavior that results in suffering.”

<!-- @segment mn88:10.9 -->

“But what kind of bodily behavior results in suffering?”

<!-- @segment mn88:10.10 -->

“Bodily behavior that leads to hurting yourself, hurting others, and hurting both,

<!-- @segment mn88:10.11 -->

and which makes unskillful qualities grow while skillful qualities decline.

<!-- @segment mn88:10.12 -->

That kind of bodily behavior is faulted by sensible ascetics and brahmins.”

<!-- @segment mn88:11.1 -->

“But what kind of verbal behavior …

<!-- @segment mn88:11.2 -->

mental behavior is faulted by sensible ascetics and brahmins?” …

<!-- @segment mn88:11.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn88:11.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn88:11.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn88:11.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn88:11.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn88:12.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn88:12.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn88:12.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn88:12.4 -->

“Mental behavior that leads to hurting yourself, hurting others, and hurting both,

<!-- @segment mn88:12.5 -->

and which makes unskillful qualities grow while skillful qualities decline.

<!-- @segment mn88:12.6 -->

That kind of mental behavior is faulted by sensible ascetics and brahmins.”

<!-- @segment mn88:13.1 -->

“Sir, does the Buddha praise giving up all these unskillful things?”

<!-- @segment mn88:13.2 -->

“Great king, the Realized One has given up all unskillful things and possesses skillful things.”

<!-- @segment mn88:14.1 -->

“But sir, what kind of bodily behavior is not faulted by sensible ascetics and brahmins?”

<!-- @segment mn88:14.2 -->

“Skillful behavior.”

<!-- @segment mn88:14.3 -->

“But what kind of bodily behavior is skillful?”

<!-- @segment mn88:14.4 -->

“Blameless behavior.”

<!-- @segment mn88:14.5 -->

“But what kind of bodily behavior is blameless?”

<!-- @segment mn88:14.6 -->

“Pleasing behavior.”

<!-- @segment mn88:14.7 -->

“But what kind of bodily behavior is pleasing?”

<!-- @segment mn88:14.8 -->

“Behavior that results in happiness.”

<!-- @segment mn88:14.9 -->

“But what kind of bodily behavior results in happiness?”

<!-- @segment mn88:14.10 -->

“Bodily behavior that leads to pleasing yourself, pleasing others, and pleasing both,

<!-- @segment mn88:14.11 -->

and which makes unskillful qualities decline while skillful qualities grow.

<!-- @segment mn88:14.12 -->

That kind of bodily behavior is not faulted by sensible ascetics and brahmins.”

<!-- @segment mn88:15.1 -->

“But what kind of verbal behavior …

<!-- @segment mn88:15.2 -->

mental behavior is not faulted by sensible ascetics and brahmins?” …

<!-- @segment mn88:15.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn88:15.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn88:15.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn88:16.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn88:16.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn88:16.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn88:16.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn88:16.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn88:16.6 -->

“Mental behavior that leads to pleasing yourself, pleasing others, and pleasing both,

<!-- @segment mn88:16.7 -->

and which makes unskillful qualities decline while skillful qualities grow.

<!-- @segment mn88:16.8 -->

That kind of mental behavior is not faulted by sensible ascetics and brahmins.”

<!-- @segment mn88:17.1 -->

“Sir, does the Buddha praise embracing all these skillful things?”

<!-- @segment mn88:17.2 -->

“Great king, the Realized One has given up all unskillful things and possesses skillful things.”

<!-- @segment mn88:18.1 -->

“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing!

<!-- @segment mn88:18.2 -->

How well this was said by Venerable Ānanda!

<!-- @segment mn88:18.3 -->

I’m delighted and satisfied with what you’ve expressed so well.

<!-- @segment mn88:18.4 -->

So much so that

<!-- @segment mn88:18.5 -->

if an elephant-treasure was suitable for you, I would give you one.

<!-- @segment mn88:18.6 -->

If a horse-treasure was suitable for you, I would give you one.

<!-- @segment mn88:18.7 -->

If a prize village was suitable for you, I would give you one.

<!-- @segment mn88:18.8 -->

But, sir, I know that

<!-- @segment mn88:18.9 -->

these things are not suitable for you.

<!-- @segment mn88:18.10 -->

This imported cloth was sent to me by King Ajātasattu of Magadha, son of the princess of Videha, packed in a parasol case. It’s exactly sixteen measures long and eight wide.

<!-- @segment mn88:18.11 -->

May Venerable Ānanda please accept it out of sympathy.”

<!-- @segment mn88:18.12 -->

“Enough, great king. My three robes are complete.”

<!-- @segment mn88:19.1 -->

“Sir, we have both seen this river Aciravatī

<!-- @segment mn88:19.2 -->

when it has rained heavily in the mountains, and the river overflows both its banks.

<!-- @segment mn88:19.3 -->

In the same way, Venerable Ānanda can make a set of three robes for himself from this imported cloak,

<!-- @segment mn88:19.4 -->

and you can share your old robes with your fellow monks.

<!-- @segment mn88:19.5 -->

In this way my religious donation will come to overflow, it seems to me.

<!-- @segment mn88:19.6 -->

Please accept the imported cloth.”

<!-- @segment mn88:20.1 -->

So Ānanda accepted it.

<!-- @segment mn88:20.2 -->

Then King Pasenadi said to him,

<!-- @segment mn88:20.3 -->

“Well, now, sir, I must go.

<!-- @segment mn88:20.4 -->

I have many duties, and much to do.”

<!-- @segment mn88:20.5 -->

“Please, great king, go at your convenience.”

<!-- @segment mn88:20.6 -->

Then King Pasenadi approved and agreed with what Ānanda said. He rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled Ānanda, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

<!-- @segment mn88:21.1 -->

Soon after he left, Ānanda went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side,

<!-- @segment mn88:21.2 -->

and told him what had happened.

<!-- @segment mn88:21.3 -->

He presented the cloth to the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn88:22.1 -->

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants,

<!-- @segment mn88:22.2 -->

“Mendicants, King Pasenadi is lucky, so very lucky,

<!-- @segment mn88:22.3 -->

to get to see Ānanda and pay homage to him.”

<!-- @segment mn88:22.4 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn88:22.5 -->

Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said.
