---
slug: mn89
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Shrines to the Teaching
---

<!-- @segment mn89:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn89:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near the Sakyan town named Medaḷumpa.

<!-- @segment mn89:2.1 -->

Now at that time King Pasenadi of Kosala had arrived at Townsville on some business.

<!-- @segment mn89:2.2 -->

Then he addressed Dīgha Kārāyana,

<!-- @segment mn89:2.3 -->

“My good Kārāyana, harness the finest chariots. We will go to a park and see the scenery.”

<!-- @segment mn89:2.4 -->

“Yes, Your Majesty,” replied Dīgha Kārāyana. He harnessed the chariots and informed the king,

<!-- @segment mn89:2.5 -->

“Sire, the finest chariots are harnessed.

<!-- @segment mn89:2.6 -->

Please go at your convenience.”

<!-- @segment mn89:3.1 -->

Then King Pasenadi mounted a fine carriage and, along with other fine carriages, set out in full royal pomp from Townsville,

<!-- @segment mn89:3.2 -->

heading for the park grounds.

<!-- @segment mn89:3.3 -->

He went by carriage as far as the terrain allowed, then descended and entered the park on foot.

<!-- @segment mn89:4.1 -->

As he was going for a walk in the park he saw roots of trees that were impressive and inspiring, quiet and still, far from the madding crowd, remote from human settlements, and fit for retreat.

<!-- @segment mn89:4.2 -->

The sight reminded him right away of the Buddha:

<!-- @segment mn89:4.3 -->

“These roots of trees, so impressive and inspiring, are like those where we used to pay homage to the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha.”

<!-- @segment mn89:4.4 -->

He addressed Dīgha Kārāyana,

<!-- @segment mn89:4.5 -->

“These roots of trees, so impressive and inspiring, are like those where we used to pay homage to the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn89:4.6 -->

My good Kārāyana, where is that Buddha at present?”

<!-- @segment mn89:5.1 -->

“Great king, there is a Sakyan town named Medaḷumpa.

<!-- @segment mn89:5.2 -->

That’s where the Buddha is now staying.”

<!-- @segment mn89:5.3 -->

“But how far away is that town?”

<!-- @segment mn89:5.4 -->

“Not far, great king,

<!-- @segment mn89:5.5 -->

it’s three leagues.

<!-- @segment mn89:5.6 -->

We can get there while it’s still light.”

<!-- @segment mn89:5.7 -->

“Well then, harness the chariots, and we shall go to see the Buddha.”

<!-- @segment mn89:5.8 -->

“Yes, Your Majesty,” replied Dīgha Kārāyana. He harnessed the chariots and informed the king,

<!-- @segment mn89:5.9 -->

“Sire, the finest chariots are harnessed.

<!-- @segment mn89:5.10 -->

Please go at your convenience.”

<!-- @segment mn89:6.1 -->

Then King Pasenadi mounted a fine carriage and, along with other fine carriages, set out from Townsville to Medaḷumpa.

<!-- @segment mn89:6.2 -->

He reached the town while it was still light

<!-- @segment mn89:6.3 -->

and headed for the monastery grounds.

<!-- @segment mn89:6.4 -->

He went by carriage as far as the terrain allowed, then descended and entered the monastery on foot.

<!-- @segment mn89:7.1 -->

At that time several mendicants were walking mindfully in the open air.

<!-- @segment mn89:7.2 -->

King Pasenadi of Kosala went up to them and said,

<!-- @segment mn89:7.3 -->

“Sirs, where is the Blessed One at present, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha?

<!-- @segment mn89:7.4 -->

For I want to see him.”

<!-- @segment mn89:8.1 -->

“Great king, that’s his dwelling, with the door closed. Approach it quietly, without hurrying; go onto the porch, clear your throat, and knock on the door-panel. The Buddha will open the door.”

<!-- @segment mn89:8.2 -->

The king right away presented his sword and turban to Dīgha Kārāyana,

<!-- @segment mn89:8.3 -->

who thought,

<!-- @segment mn89:8.4 -->

“Now the king seeks privacy. I should wait here.”

<!-- @segment mn89:8.5 -->

Then the king approached the Buddha’s dwelling, cleared his throat and knocked on the door-panel, and the Buddha opened the door.

<!-- @segment mn89:9.1 -->

King Pasenadi entered the dwelling, and bowed with his head at the Buddha’s feet, caressing them and covering them with kisses, and pronounced his name:

<!-- @segment mn89:9.2 -->

“Sir, I am Pasenadi, king of Kosala!

<!-- @segment mn89:9.3 -->

I am Pasenadi, king of Kosala!”

<!-- @segment mn89:9.4 -->

“But great king, for what reason do you demonstrate such utmost devotion for this body, conveying your manifest love?”

<!-- @segment mn89:10.1 -->

“Sir, I infer about the Buddha from the teaching:

<!-- @segment mn89:10.2 -->

‘The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.’

<!-- @segment mn89:10.3 -->

It happens, sir, that I see some ascetics and brahmins leading the spiritual life only for a limited period: ten, twenty, thirty, or forty years.

<!-- @segment mn89:10.4 -->

Some time later—nicely bathed and anointed, with hair and beard dressed—they amuse themselves, supplied and provided with the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

<!-- @segment mn89:10.5 -->

But here I see the mendicants leading the spiritual life entirely full and pure as long as they live, to their last breath.

<!-- @segment mn89:10.6 -->

I don’t see any other spiritual life elsewhere so full and pure.

<!-- @segment mn89:10.7 -->

That’s why I infer this about the Buddha from the teaching:

<!-- @segment mn89:10.8 -->

‘The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.’

<!-- @segment mn89:11.1 -->

Furthermore, kings fight with kings, aristocrats fight with aristocrats, brahmins fight with brahmins, householders fight with householders. A mother fights with her child, child with mother, father with child, and child with father. Brother fights with brother, brother with sister, sister with brother, and friend fights with friend.

<!-- @segment mn89:11.2 -->

But here I see the mendicants living in harmony, appreciating each other, without dispute, blending like milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes.

<!-- @segment mn89:11.3 -->

I don’t see any other assembly elsewhere so harmonious.

<!-- @segment mn89:11.4 -->

So I infer this about the Buddha from the teaching:

<!-- @segment mn89:11.5 -->

‘The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.’

<!-- @segment mn89:12.1 -->

Furthermore, I have walked and wandered from monastery to monastery and from park to park.

<!-- @segment mn89:12.2 -->

There I’ve seen some ascetics and brahmins who are thin, haggard, pale, and veiny—hardly a captivating sight for people, you’d think.

<!-- @segment mn89:12.3 -->

It occurred to me:

<!-- @segment mn89:12.4 -->

‘Clearly these venerables lead the spiritual life dissatisfied, or they’re hiding some bad deed they’ve done.

<!-- @segment mn89:12.5 -->

That’s why they’re thin, haggard, pale, and veiny—hardly a captivating sight for people, you’d think.’

<!-- @segment mn89:12.6 -->

I went up to them and said:

<!-- @segment mn89:12.7 -->

‘Venerables, why are you so thin, haggard, pale, and veiny—hardly a captivating sight for people, you’d think?’

<!-- @segment mn89:12.8 -->

They say:

<!-- @segment mn89:12.9 -->

‘We have jaundice, great king.’

<!-- @segment mn89:12.10 -->

But here I see mendicants always smiling and joyful, obviously happy, with cheerful faces, living relaxed, unruffled, surviving on charity, their hearts free as a wild deer.

<!-- @segment mn89:12.11 -->

It occurred to me:

<!-- @segment mn89:12.12 -->

‘Clearly these venerables have realized a higher distinction in the Buddha’s instructions than they had before.

<!-- @segment mn89:12.13 -->

That’s why these venerables are always smiling and joyful, obviously happy, with cheerful faces, living relaxed, unruffled, surviving on charity, their hearts free as a wild deer.’

<!-- @segment mn89:12.14 -->

So I infer this about the Buddha from the teaching:

<!-- @segment mn89:12.15 -->

‘The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.’

<!-- @segment mn89:13.1 -->

Furthermore, as an anointed aristocratic king

<!-- @segment mn89:13.2 -->

I am able to execute, fine, or banish those who are guilty.

<!-- @segment mn89:13.3 -->

Yet when I’m sitting in court they interrupt me.

<!-- @segment mn89:13.4 -->

And I can’t get them

<!-- @segment mn89:13.5 -->

to stop interrupting me and wait until I’ve finished speaking.

<!-- @segment mn89:13.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn89:13.7 -->

But here I’ve seen the mendicants

<!-- @segment mn89:13.8 -->

while the Buddha is teaching an assembly of many hundreds, and there is no sound of his disciples coughing or clearing their throats.

<!-- @segment mn89:13.9 -->

Once it so happened that the Buddha was teaching an assembly of many hundreds.

<!-- @segment mn89:13.10 -->

Then one of his disciples cleared their throat.

<!-- @segment mn89:13.11 -->

And one of their spiritual companions nudged them with their knee, to indicate:

<!-- @segment mn89:13.12 -->

‘Hush, venerable, don’t make a sound! Our teacher, the Blessed One, is teaching!’

<!-- @segment mn89:13.13 -->

It occurred to me:

<!-- @segment mn89:13.14 -->

‘Oh lord, how incredible, how amazing,

<!-- @segment mn89:13.15 -->

how an assembly can be so well trained without rod or sword!’

<!-- @segment mn89:13.16 -->

I don’t see any other assembly elsewhere so well trained.

<!-- @segment mn89:13.17 -->

So I infer this about the Buddha from the teaching:

<!-- @segment mn89:13.18 -->

‘The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.’

<!-- @segment mn89:14.1 -->

Furthermore, I’ve seen some clever aristocrats who are subtle, accomplished in the doctrines of others, hair-splitters. You’d think they live to demolish convictions with their intellect.

<!-- @segment mn89:14.2 -->

They hear:

<!-- @segment mn89:14.3 -->

‘So, gentlemen, that ascetic Gotama will come down to such and such village or town.’

<!-- @segment mn89:14.4 -->

They formulate a question, thinking:

<!-- @segment mn89:14.5 -->

‘We’ll approach the ascetic Gotama and ask him this question.

<!-- @segment mn89:14.6 -->

If he answers like this, we’ll refute him like that;

<!-- @segment mn89:14.7 -->

and if he answers like that, we’ll refute him like this.’

<!-- @segment mn89:14.8 -->

When they hear that

<!-- @segment mn89:14.9 -->

he has come down

<!-- @segment mn89:14.10 -->

they approach him.

<!-- @segment mn89:14.11 -->

The Buddha educates, encourages, fires up, and inspires them with a Dhamma talk.

<!-- @segment mn89:14.12 -->

They don’t even get around to asking their question to the Buddha, so how could they refute his answer?

<!-- @segment mn89:14.13 -->

Invariably, they become his disciples.

<!-- @segment mn89:14.14 -->

So I infer this about the Buddha from the teaching:

<!-- @segment mn89:14.15 -->

‘The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.’

<!-- @segment mn89:15.1 -->

Furthermore, I see some clever brahmins …

<!-- @segment mn89:16.1 -->

some clever householders …

<!-- @segment mn89:17.1 -->

some clever ascetics who are subtle, accomplished in the doctrines of others, hair-splitters. …

<!-- @segment mn89:17.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn89:17.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn89:17.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn89:17.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn89:17.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn89:17.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn89:17.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn89:17.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn89:17.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn89:17.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn89:17.12 -->

They don’t even get around to asking their question to the Buddha, so how could they refute his answer?

<!-- @segment mn89:17.13 -->

Invariably, they ask the ascetic Gotama for the chance to go forth.

<!-- @segment mn89:17.14 -->

And he gives them the going-forth.

<!-- @segment mn89:17.15 -->

Soon after going forth, living withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, they realize the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. They live having achieved with their own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment mn89:17.16 -->

They say:

<!-- @segment mn89:17.17 -->

‘We were almost lost! We almost perished!

<!-- @segment mn89:17.18 -->

For we used to claim that we were ascetics, brahmins, and perfected ones, but we were none of these things.

<!-- @segment mn89:17.19 -->

But now we really are ascetics, brahmins, and perfected ones!’

<!-- @segment mn89:17.20 -->

So I infer this about the Buddha from the teaching:

<!-- @segment mn89:17.21 -->

‘The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.’

<!-- @segment mn89:18.1 -->

Furthermore, these chamberlains Isidatta and Purāṇa share my meals and my carriages. I give them a livelihood and bring them renown.

<!-- @segment mn89:18.2 -->

And yet they don’t show me the same level of devotion that they show to the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn89:18.3 -->

Once it so happened that while I was leading a military campaign and testing Isidatta and Purāṇa I took up residence in a cramped house.

<!-- @segment mn89:18.4 -->

They spent much of the night discussing the teaching, then they lay down with their heads towards where the Buddha was and their feet towards me.

<!-- @segment mn89:18.5 -->

It occurred to me:

<!-- @segment mn89:18.6 -->

‘Oh lord, how incredible, how amazing!

<!-- @segment mn89:18.7 -->

These chamberlains Isidatta and Purāṇa share my meals and my carriages. I give them a livelihood and bring them renown.

<!-- @segment mn89:18.8 -->

And yet they don’t show me the same level of devotion that they show to the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn89:18.9 -->

Clearly these venerables have realized a higher distinction in the Buddha’s instructions than they had before.’

<!-- @segment mn89:18.10 -->

So I infer this about the Buddha from the teaching:

<!-- @segment mn89:18.11 -->

‘The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.’

<!-- @segment mn89:19.1 -->

Furthermore, the Buddha is an aristocrat, and so am I.

<!-- @segment mn89:19.2 -->

The Buddha is Kosalan, and so am I.

<!-- @segment mn89:19.3 -->

The Buddha is eighty years old, and so am I.

<!-- @segment mn89:19.4 -->

Since this is so,

<!-- @segment mn89:19.5 -->

it’s proper for me to act with such utmost deference for the Buddha and demonstrate such friendship.

<!-- @segment mn89:20.1 -->

Well, now, sir, I must go.

<!-- @segment mn89:20.2 -->

I have many duties, and much to do.”

<!-- @segment mn89:20.3 -->

“Please, great king, go at your convenience.”

<!-- @segment mn89:20.4 -->

Then King Pasenadi rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

<!-- @segment mn89:21.1 -->

Soon after the king had left, the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment mn89:21.2 -->

“Mendicants, before he got up and left, King Pasenadi spoke shrines to the teaching.

<!-- @segment mn89:21.3 -->

Learn these shrines to the teaching!

<!-- @segment mn89:21.4 -->

Memorize these shrines to the teaching!

<!-- @segment mn89:21.5 -->

Remember these shrines to the teaching!

<!-- @segment mn89:21.6 -->

These shrines to the teaching are beneficial and relate to the fundamentals of the spiritual life.”

<!-- @segment mn89:21.7 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn89:21.8 -->

Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said.
