---
slug: mn90
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: At Kaṇṇakatthala
---

<!-- @segment mn90:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn90:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Ujuññā, in the deer park at Kaṇṇakatthala.

<!-- @segment mn90:2.1 -->

Now at that time King Pasenadi of Kosala had arrived at Ujuññā on some business.

<!-- @segment mn90:2.2 -->

Then he addressed a man,

<!-- @segment mn90:2.3 -->

“Please, my man, go to the Buddha, and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Ask him if he is healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably.

<!-- @segment mn90:2.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:2.5 -->

And then say:

<!-- @segment mn90:2.6 -->

‘Sir, King Pasenadi of Kosala will come to see you today when he has finished breakfast.’”

<!-- @segment mn90:2.7 -->

“Yes, Your Majesty,” that man replied. He did as the king asked.

<!-- @segment mn90:2.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:2.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:2.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:3.1 -->

The sisters Somā and Sakulā heard this.

<!-- @segment mn90:3.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:3.3 -->

While the meal was being served, they approached the king and said,

<!-- @segment mn90:3.4 -->

“Great king, since you are going to the Buddha, please bow in our name with your head to his feet. Ask him if he is healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably.”

<!-- @segment mn90:3.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:4.1 -->

When he had finished breakfast, King Pasenadi went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn90:4.2 -->

“Sir, the sisters Somā and Sakulā bow with their heads to your feet. They ask if you are healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably.”

<!-- @segment mn90:4.3 -->

“But, great king, couldn’t they get any other messenger?”

<!-- @segment mn90:4.4 -->

So Pasenadi explained the circumstances of the message.

<!-- @segment mn90:4.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:4.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:4.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:4.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:4.9 -->

The Buddha said, “May the sisters Somā and Sakulā be happy, great king.”

<!-- @segment mn90:5.1 -->

Then the king said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn90:5.2 -->

“I have heard, sir, that the ascetic Gotama says this:

<!-- @segment mn90:5.3 -->

‘There is no ascetic or brahmin who will ever claim to be all-knowing and all-seeing, to know and see everything without exception: that is not possible.’

<!-- @segment mn90:5.4 -->

Do those who say this repeat what the Buddha has said, and not misrepresent him with an untruth? Is their explanation in line with the teaching? Are there any legitimate grounds for rebuttal and criticism?”

<!-- @segment mn90:5.5 -->

“Great king, those who say this do not repeat what I have said. They misrepresent me with what is false and untrue.”

<!-- @segment mn90:6.1 -->

Then King Pasenadi addressed General Viḍūḍabha,

<!-- @segment mn90:6.2 -->

“General, who introduced this topic of discussion to the royal compound?”

<!-- @segment mn90:6.3 -->

“It was Sañjaya, great king, the brahmin of the Ākāsa clan.”

<!-- @segment mn90:7.1 -->

Then the king addressed a man,

<!-- @segment mn90:7.2 -->

“Please, my man, in my name tell Sañjaya that

<!-- @segment mn90:7.3 -->

King Pasenadi summons him.”

<!-- @segment mn90:7.4 -->

“Yes, Your Majesty,” that man replied. He did as the king asked.

<!-- @segment mn90:7.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:8.1 -->

Then the king said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn90:8.2 -->

“Sir, might the Buddha have spoken in reference to one thing, but that person believed it was something else?

<!-- @segment mn90:8.3 -->

How then do you recall making this statement?”

<!-- @segment mn90:8.4 -->

“Great king, I recall making this statement:

<!-- @segment mn90:8.5 -->

‘There is no ascetic or brahmin who will ever know all and see all simultaneously: that is not possible.’”

<!-- @segment mn90:8.6 -->

“What the Buddha says appears reasonable.

<!-- @segment mn90:8.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:9.1 -->

Sir, there are these four classes:

<!-- @segment mn90:9.2 -->

aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and menials.

<!-- @segment mn90:9.3 -->

Is there any difference between them?”

<!-- @segment mn90:9.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:9.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:9.6 -->

“Of the four classes, two are said to be preeminent—

<!-- @segment mn90:9.7 -->

the aristocrats and the brahmins.

<!-- @segment mn90:9.8 -->

That is, when it comes to bowing down, rising up, greeting with cupped palms, and observing proper etiquette.”

<!-- @segment mn90:10.1 -->

“Sir, I am not asking you about this life,

<!-- @segment mn90:10.2 -->

but about the life to come.”

<!-- @segment mn90:10.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:10.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:10.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:10.6 -->

“Great king, there are these five factors that support meditation.

<!-- @segment mn90:10.7 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment mn90:10.8 -->

It’s when a mendicant has faith in the Realized One’s awakening:

<!-- @segment mn90:10.9 -->

‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’

<!-- @segment mn90:10.10 -->

They are rarely ill or unwell. Their stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too cold, but just right, and fit for meditation.

<!-- @segment mn90:10.11 -->

They’re not devious or deceitful. They reveal themselves honestly to the Teacher or sensible spiritual companions.

<!-- @segment mn90:10.12 -->

They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They’re strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities.

<!-- @segment mn90:10.13 -->

They’re wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering.

<!-- @segment mn90:10.14 -->

These are the five factors that support meditation.

<!-- @segment mn90:10.15 -->

There are these four classes:

<!-- @segment mn90:10.16 -->

aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and menials.

<!-- @segment mn90:10.17 -->

If they had these five factors that support meditation,

<!-- @segment mn90:10.18 -->

that would be for their lasting welfare and happiness.”

<!-- @segment mn90:11.1 -->

“Sir, there are these four classes:

<!-- @segment mn90:11.2 -->

aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and menials.

<!-- @segment mn90:11.3 -->

If they had these five factors that support meditation,

<!-- @segment mn90:11.4 -->

would there be any difference between them?”

<!-- @segment mn90:11.5 -->

“In that case, I say it is the disparity of their efforts in meditation.

<!-- @segment mn90:11.6 -->

Suppose there was a pair of elephants or horses or oxen in training who were well tamed and well trained. And there was a pair who were not tamed or trained.

<!-- @segment mn90:11.7 -->

What do you think, great king?

<!-- @segment mn90:11.8 -->

Wouldn’t the pair that was well tamed and well trained perform the tasks of the tamed, and reach the level of the tamed?”

<!-- @segment mn90:11.9 -->

“Yes, sir.”

<!-- @segment mn90:11.10 -->

“But would the pair that was not tamed and trained perform the tasks of the tamed and reach the level of the tamed, just like the tamed pair?”

<!-- @segment mn90:11.11 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment mn90:11.12 -->

“In the same way, there are things that must be attained by someone with faith, health, integrity, energy, and wisdom. It’s not possible for a faithless, unhealthy, deceitful, lazy, witless person to attain them.”

<!-- @segment mn90:12.1 -->

“What the Buddha says appears reasonable.

<!-- @segment mn90:12.2 -->

Sir, there are these four classes:

<!-- @segment mn90:12.3 -->

aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and workers.

<!-- @segment mn90:12.4 -->

If they had these five factors that support meditation, and if they practiced rightly,

<!-- @segment mn90:12.5 -->

would there be any difference between them?”

<!-- @segment mn90:12.6 -->

“In that case, I say that there is no difference between the freedom of one and the freedom of the other.

<!-- @segment mn90:12.7 -->

Suppose a person took dry teak wood and lit a fire and produced heat.

<!-- @segment mn90:12.8 -->

Then another person did the same using sāl wood,

<!-- @segment mn90:12.9 -->

another used mango wood,

<!-- @segment mn90:12.10 -->

while another used wood of the cluster fig.

<!-- @segment mn90:12.11 -->

What do you think, great king?

<!-- @segment mn90:12.12 -->

Would there be any difference between the fires produced by these different kinds of wood, that is, in the flame, color, or luminosity?”

<!-- @segment mn90:12.13 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment mn90:12.14 -->

“In the same way, when fire has been churned by energy and produced by effort, I say that there is no difference between the freedom of one and the freedom of the other.”

<!-- @segment mn90:13.1 -->

“What the Buddha says appears reasonable.

<!-- @segment mn90:13.2 -->

But sir, do gods survive?”

<!-- @segment mn90:13.3 -->

“But what exactly are you asking?”

<!-- @segment mn90:13.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:13.5 -->

“Whether those gods come back to this place or not.”

<!-- @segment mn90:13.6 -->

“Those gods who are afflicted come back to this place, but those who are unafflicted do not come back.”

<!-- @segment mn90:14.1 -->

When he said this, General Viḍūḍabha said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn90:14.2 -->

“Sir, will the gods who are afflicted topple or expel from their place the gods who are unafflicted?”

<!-- @segment mn90:14.3 -->

Then Venerable Ānanda thought,

<!-- @segment mn90:14.4 -->

“This General Viḍūḍabha is King Pasenadi’s son,

<!-- @segment mn90:14.5 -->

and I am the Buddha’s son.

<!-- @segment mn90:14.6 -->

Now is the time for one son to confer with another.”

<!-- @segment mn90:14.7 -->

So Ānanda addressed General Viḍūḍabha,

<!-- @segment mn90:14.8 -->

“Well then, general, I’ll ask you about this in return, and you can answer as you like.

<!-- @segment mn90:14.9 -->

What do you think, general?

<!-- @segment mn90:14.10 -->

As far as the dominion of King Pasenadi of Kosala extends, where he rules as sovereign lord, can he topple or expel from that place any ascetic or brahmin, regardless of whether they are good or bad, or whether or not they are genuine spiritual practitioners?”

<!-- @segment mn90:14.11 -->

“He can, worthy.”

<!-- @segment mn90:14.12 -->

“What do you think, general?

<!-- @segment mn90:14.13 -->

As far as the dominion of King Pasenadi does not extend, where he does not rule as sovereign lord, can he topple or expel from that place any ascetic or brahmin, regardless of whether they are good or bad, or whether or not they are genuine spiritual practitioners?”

<!-- @segment mn90:14.14 -->

“He cannot, worthy.”

<!-- @segment mn90:14.15 -->

“What do you think, general?

<!-- @segment mn90:14.16 -->

Have you heard of the gods of the thirty-three?”

<!-- @segment mn90:14.17 -->

“Yes, worthy,

<!-- @segment mn90:14.18 -->

I’ve heard of them,

<!-- @segment mn90:14.19 -->

and so has the worthy King Pasenadi.”

<!-- @segment mn90:14.20 -->

“What do you think, general?

<!-- @segment mn90:14.21 -->

Can King Pasenadi topple or expel from their place the gods of the thirty-three?”

<!-- @segment mn90:14.22 -->

“King Pasenadi can’t even see the gods of the thirty-three, so how could he possibly topple or expel them from their place?”

<!-- @segment mn90:14.23 -->

“In the same way, general, the gods who are afflicted can’t even see the gods who are unafflicted, so how could they possibly topple or expel them from their place?”

<!-- @segment mn90:15.1 -->

Then the king said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn90:15.2 -->

“Sir, what is this mendicant’s name?”

<!-- @segment mn90:15.3 -->

“Ānanda, great king.”

<!-- @segment mn90:15.4 -->

“A joy he is, and a joy he seems!

<!-- @segment mn90:15.5 -->

What Venerable Ānanda says seems reasonable.

<!-- @segment mn90:15.6 -->

But sir, does a divinity survive?”

<!-- @segment mn90:15.7 -->

“But what exactly are you asking?”

<!-- @segment mn90:15.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:15.9 -->

“Whether that Divinity comes back to this place or not.”

<!-- @segment mn90:15.10 -->

“A divinity who is afflicted comes back to this place, but one who is unafflicted does not come back.”

<!-- @segment mn90:16.1 -->

Then a certain man said to the king,

<!-- @segment mn90:16.2 -->

“Great king, Sañjaya, the brahmin of the Ākāsa clan, has come.”

<!-- @segment mn90:16.3 -->

Then King Pasenadi asked Sañjaya,

<!-- @segment mn90:16.4 -->

“Brahmin, who introduced this topic of discussion to the royal compound?”

<!-- @segment mn90:16.5 -->

“It was General Viḍūḍabha, great king.”

<!-- @segment mn90:16.6 -->

But Viḍūḍabha said,

<!-- @segment mn90:16.7 -->

“It was Sañjaya, great king, the brahmin of the Ākāsa clan.”

<!-- @segment mn90:17.1 -->

Then a certain man said to the king,

<!-- @segment mn90:17.2 -->

“It’s time to go, great king.”

<!-- @segment mn90:17.3 -->

So the king said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn90:17.4 -->

“Sir, I asked you about omniscience, and you answered.

<!-- @segment mn90:17.5 -->

I endorse and accept this, and am satisfied with it.

<!-- @segment mn90:17.6 -->

I asked you about purification in the four classes,

<!-- @segment mn90:17.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:17.8 -->

about the gods,

<!-- @segment mn90:17.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:17.10 -->

and about divinities, and you answered in each case.

<!-- @segment mn90:17.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:17.12 -->

Whatever I asked the Buddha about, he answered.

<!-- @segment mn90:17.13 -->

I endorse and accept this, and am satisfied with it.

<!-- @segment mn90:17.14 -->

Well, now, sir, I must go.

<!-- @segment mn90:17.15 -->

I have many duties, and much to do.”

<!-- @segment mn90:17.16 -->

“Please, great king, go at your convenience.”

<!-- @segment mn90:18.1 -->

Then King Pasenadi approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. Then he rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

<!-- @segment mn90:18.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:18.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:19.1 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:19.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:19.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:19.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn90:19.5 -->
