---
slug: mn91
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Brahmāyu
---

<!-- @segment mn91:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn91:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Videhans together with a large Saṅgha of five hundred mendicants.

<!-- @segment mn91:2.1 -->

Now at that time the brahmin Brahmāyu was residing in Mithilā. He was old, elderly, and senior, advanced in years, having reached the final stage of life; he was a hundred and twenty years old. He had mastered the three Vedas, together with their vocabularies and ritual performance, their phonology and word classification, and the testaments as fifth. He knew them word-by-word, and their grammar. He was well versed in cosmology and the marks of a great man.

<!-- @segment mn91:3.1 -->

He heard:

<!-- @segment mn91:3.2 -->

“It seems the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—is wandering in the land of the Videhans, together with a large Saṅgha of five hundred mendicants.

<!-- @segment mn91:3.3 -->

He has this good reputation:

<!-- @segment mn91:3.4 -->

‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’

<!-- @segment mn91:3.5 -->

He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others.

<!-- @segment mn91:3.6 -->

He proclaims a teaching that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure.

<!-- @segment mn91:3.7 -->

It’s good to see such perfected ones.”

<!-- @segment mn91:4.1 -->

Now at that time the brahmin Brahmāyu had a pupil named Uttara. He too had mastered the Vedic curriculum.

<!-- @segment mn91:4.2 -->

Brahmāyu told Uttara of the Buddha’s presence in the land of the Videhans, and added:

<!-- @segment mn91:4.3 -->



<!-- @segment mn91:4.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn91:4.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn91:4.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn91:4.7 -->

“Please, dear Uttara, go to the ascetic Gotama and find out whether or not he lives up to his reputation.

<!-- @segment mn91:4.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn91:4.9 -->

Through you I shall learn about the worthy Gotama.”

<!-- @segment mn91:5.1 -->

“But sir, how shall I find out whether or not the ascetic Gotama lives up to his reputation?”

<!-- @segment mn91:5.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn91:5.3 -->

“Dear Uttara, the thirty-two marks of a great man have been handed down in our hymns. A great man who possesses these has only two possible destinies, no other.

<!-- @segment mn91:5.4 -->

If he stays at home he becomes a king, a wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king. His dominion extends to all four sides, he achieves stability in the country, and he possesses the seven treasures.

<!-- @segment mn91:5.5 -->

He has the following seven treasures:

<!-- @segment mn91:5.6 -->

the wheel, the elephant, the horse, the jewel, the woman, the householder, and the commander as the seventh treasure.

<!-- @segment mn91:5.7 -->

He has over a thousand sons who are valiant and heroic, crushing the armies of his enemies.

<!-- @segment mn91:5.8 -->

After conquering this land girt by sea, he reigns by principle, without rod or sword.

<!-- @segment mn91:5.9 -->

But if he goes forth from the lay life to homelessness, he becomes a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha, who has cast off the world’s veil.

<!-- @segment mn91:5.10 -->

But, dear Uttara, I am the one who gives the hymns,

<!-- @segment mn91:5.11 -->

and you are the one who receives them.”

<!-- @segment mn91:6.1 -->

“Yes, worthy sir,” replied Uttara. He rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled Brahmāyu before setting out for the land of the Videhans where the Buddha was wandering.

<!-- @segment mn91:6.2 -->

Traveling stage by stage, he came to the Buddha and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment mn91:6.3 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side,

<!-- @segment mn91:6.4 -->

and scrutinized his body for the thirty-two marks of a great man.

<!-- @segment mn91:6.5 -->

He saw all of them except for two,

<!-- @segment mn91:6.6 -->

which he had doubts about:

<!-- @segment mn91:6.7 -->

whether the private parts are sheathed in a foreskin, and the largeness of the tongue.

<!-- @segment mn91:6.8 -->

Then it occurred to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn91:6.9 -->

“This student Uttara sees all the marks except for two,

<!-- @segment mn91:6.10 -->

which he has doubts about:

<!-- @segment mn91:6.11 -->

whether the private parts are sheathed in a foreskin, and the largeness of the tongue.”

<!-- @segment mn91:7.1 -->

So the Buddha used his psychic power to will that Uttara would see his private parts sheathed in a foreskin.

<!-- @segment mn91:7.2 -->

And he stuck out his tongue and stroked back and forth on his ear holes and nostrils, and covered his entire forehead with his tongue.

<!-- @segment mn91:8.1 -->

Then Uttara thought,

<!-- @segment mn91:8.2 -->

“The ascetic Gotama possesses the thirty-two marks.

<!-- @segment mn91:8.3 -->

Why don’t I follow him and observe his deportment?”

<!-- @segment mn91:8.4 -->

So Uttara followed the Buddha like a shadow for seven months.

<!-- @segment mn91:8.5 -->

When seven months had passed he set out wandering towards Mithilā.

<!-- @segment mn91:8.6 -->

There he approached the brahmin Brahmāyu, bowed, and sat down to one side. Brahmāyu said to him,

<!-- @segment mn91:8.7 -->

“Well, dear Uttara, does the worthy Gotama live up to his reputation or not?”

<!-- @segment mn91:8.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn91:8.9 -->

“He does, sir.

<!-- @segment mn91:8.10 -->



<!-- @segment mn91:8.11 -->

The worthy Gotama possesses the thirty-two marks.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.1 -->

He has well-planted feet.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn91:9.3 -->

On the soles of his feet there are thousand-spoked wheels, with rims and hubs, complete in every detail.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.4 -->

He has stretched heels.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.5 -->

He has long fingers.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.6 -->

His hands and feet are tender.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.7 -->

He has serried hands and feet.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.8 -->

The tops of his feet are arched.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.9 -->

His calves are like those of an antelope.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.10 -->

When standing upright and not bending over, the palms of both hands touch the knees.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.11 -->

His private parts are sheathed in a foreskin.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.12 -->

He is golden colored; his skin shines like lustrous gold.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.13 -->

He has delicate skin, so delicate that dust and dirt don’t stick to his body.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.14 -->

His hairs grow one per pore.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.15 -->

His hairs stand up; they’re blue-black and curl clockwise.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.16 -->

His body is tall and straight-limbed.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.17 -->

He has bulging muscles in seven places.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.18 -->

His chest is like that of a lion.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.19 -->

He is filled out between the shoulders.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.20 -->

He has the proportional circumference of a banyan tree: the span of his arms equals the height of his body.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.21 -->

His torso is cylindrical.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.22 -->

He has ridged taste buds.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.23 -->

His jaw is like that of a lion.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.24 -->

He has forty teeth.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.25 -->

His teeth are even.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.26 -->

His teeth have no gaps.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.27 -->

His teeth are perfectly white.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.28 -->

He has a large tongue.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.29 -->

He has the voice of the Divinity, like a cuckoo’s call.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.30 -->

His eyes are indigo.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.31 -->

He has eyelashes like a cow’s.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.32 -->

Between his eyebrows there grows a tuft, soft and white like cotton-wool.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.33 -->

The crown of his head is like a turban.

<!-- @segment mn91:9.34 -->

These are the thirty-two marks of a great man possessed by the worthy Gotama.

<!-- @segment mn91:10.1 -->

When he’s walking he takes the first step with the right foot.

<!-- @segment mn91:10.2 -->

He doesn’t lift his foot too far or place it too near.

<!-- @segment mn91:10.3 -->

He doesn’t walk too slow or too fast.

<!-- @segment mn91:10.4 -->

He walks without knocking his knees or ankles together.

<!-- @segment mn91:10.5 -->

When he’s walking he keeps his thighs neither too straight nor too bent, neither too tight nor too loose.

<!-- @segment mn91:10.6 -->

When he walks, only the lower half of his body moves, and he walks effortlessly.

<!-- @segment mn91:10.7 -->

When he turns to look he does so with the whole body.

<!-- @segment mn91:10.8 -->

He doesn’t look directly up or down.

<!-- @segment mn91:10.9 -->

He doesn’t look all around while walking, but focuses a plough’s length in front. Beyond that he has unhindered knowledge and vision.

<!-- @segment mn91:11.1 -->

When entering an inhabited area he keeps his body neither too straight nor too bent, neither too tight nor too loose.

<!-- @segment mn91:12.1 -->

He turns around neither too far nor too close to the seat. He doesn’t lean on his hand when sitting down. And he doesn’t just plonk his body down on the seat.

<!-- @segment mn91:12.2 -->

When sitting in inhabited areas he doesn’t fidget with his hands or feet.

<!-- @segment mn91:12.3 -->

He doesn’t sit with his knees or ankles crossed.

<!-- @segment mn91:12.4 -->

He doesn’t sit with his hand holding his chin.

<!-- @segment mn91:12.5 -->

When sitting in inhabited areas he doesn’t shake, tremble, quake, or get nervous, and so he is not nervous at all.

<!-- @segment mn91:12.6 -->

When sitting in inhabited areas he still practices seclusion.

<!-- @segment mn91:13.1 -->

When receiving water for rinsing the bowl, he holds the bowl neither too straight nor too bent, neither too tight nor too loose.

<!-- @segment mn91:14.1 -->

He receives neither too little nor too much water.

<!-- @segment mn91:14.2 -->

He rinses the bowl without making a sloshing noise, or spinning it around. He doesn’t put the bowl on the ground to rinse his hands; his hands and bowl are rinsed at the same time.

<!-- @segment mn91:14.3 -->

He doesn’t throw the bowl rinsing water away too far or too near, or splash it about.

<!-- @segment mn91:14.4 -->

When receiving rice, he holds the bowl neither too straight nor too bent, neither too close nor too loose.

<!-- @segment mn91:14.5 -->

He receives neither too little nor too much rice.

<!-- @segment mn91:14.6 -->

He eats sauce in a moderate proportion, and doesn’t put too much sauce on his portions.

<!-- @segment mn91:14.7 -->

He chews over each portion two or three times before swallowing.

<!-- @segment mn91:14.8 -->

But no grain of rice enters his body unchewed, and none remain in his mouth.

<!-- @segment mn91:14.9 -->

Only then does he raise another portion to his lips.

<!-- @segment mn91:14.10 -->

He eats experiencing the taste, but without experiencing greed for the taste.

<!-- @segment mn91:14.11 -->

He eats food thinking of eight reasons:

<!-- @segment mn91:14.12 -->

‘Not for fun, indulgence, adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain this body, to avoid harm, and to support spiritual practice. In this way, I shall put an end to old discomfort and not give rise to new discomfort, and I will have the means to keep going, blamelessness, and a comfortable abiding.’

<!-- @segment mn91:15.1 -->

After eating, when receiving water for washing the bowl, he holds the bowl neither too straight nor too bent, neither too tight nor too loose.

<!-- @segment mn91:15.2 -->

He receives neither too little nor too much water.

<!-- @segment mn91:15.3 -->

He washes the bowl without making a sloshing noise, or spinning it around. He doesn’t put the bowl on the ground to wash his hands; his hands and bowl are washed at the same time.

<!-- @segment mn91:15.4 -->

He doesn’t throw the bowl washing water away too far or too near, or splash it about.

<!-- @segment mn91:16.1 -->

After eating he doesn’t put the bowl on the ground too far away or too close. He’s not careless with his bowl, nor does he spend too much time on it.

<!-- @segment mn91:17.1 -->

After eating he sits a while in silence, but doesn’t wait too long to give the verses of appreciation.

<!-- @segment mn91:17.2 -->

After eating he expresses appreciation without criticizing the meal or expecting another one.

<!-- @segment mn91:17.3 -->

Invariably, he educates, encourages, fires up, and inspires that assembly with a Dhamma talk.

<!-- @segment mn91:17.4 -->

Then he gets up from his seat and leaves.

<!-- @segment mn91:18.1 -->

He walks neither too fast nor too slow, without wanting to get out of there.

<!-- @segment mn91:19.1 -->

He wears his robe on his body neither too high nor too low, neither too clinging nor too loose.

<!-- @segment mn91:19.2 -->

The wind doesn’t blow his robe off his body.

<!-- @segment mn91:19.3 -->

And dust and dirt don’t stick to his body.

<!-- @segment mn91:20.1 -->

When he has gone to the monastery he sits on a seat spread out and washes his feet.

<!-- @segment mn91:20.2 -->

But he doesn’t waste time with pedicures.

<!-- @segment mn91:20.3 -->

When he has washed his feet, he sits down cross-legged, sets his body straight, and brings mindfulness to the present.

<!-- @segment mn91:20.4 -->

He has no intention to hurt himself, hurt others, or hurt both.

<!-- @segment mn91:20.5 -->

He only wishes for the welfare of himself, of others, of both, and of the whole world.

<!-- @segment mn91:21.1 -->

In the monastery when he teaches Dhamma to an assembly, he neither flatters them nor rebukes them.

<!-- @segment mn91:21.2 -->

Invariably, he educates, encourages, fires up, and inspires that assembly with a Dhamma talk.

<!-- @segment mn91:21.3 -->

The sound of his voice has eight qualities:

<!-- @segment mn91:21.4 -->

it is clear, comprehensible, charming, audible, lucid, undistorted, deep, and resonant.

<!-- @segment mn91:21.5 -->

He makes sure his voice is intelligible as far as the assembly goes, but the sound doesn’t extend outside the assembly.

<!-- @segment mn91:21.6 -->

And when they’ve been inspired with a Dhamma talk by the worthy Gotama they get up from their seats and leave looking back at him alone, and not forgetting their lesson.

<!-- @segment mn91:22.1 -->

I have seen the worthy Gotama walking and standing; entering inhabited areas, and sitting and eating there; sitting silently after eating, and expressing appreciation; going to the monastery, sitting silently there, and teaching Dhamma to an assembly there.

<!-- @segment mn91:22.2 -->

Such is the worthy Gotama; such he is and more than that.”

<!-- @segment mn91:23.1 -->

When he had spoken, the brahmin Brahmāyu rose from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his cupped palms toward the Buddha, and uttered this aphorism three times:

<!-- @segment mn91:23.2 -->

“Homage to him, the blessed one, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha!

<!-- @segment mn91:23.3 -->

Homage to him, the blessed one, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha!

<!-- @segment mn91:23.4 -->

Homage to him, the blessed one, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha!

<!-- @segment mn91:23.5 -->

Hopefully, some time or other I’ll get to meet him, and we can have a discussion.”

<!-- @segment mn91:24.1 -->

And then the Buddha, traveling stage by stage in the Videhan lands, arrived at Mithilā,

<!-- @segment mn91:24.2 -->

where he stayed in the Maghadeva Mango Grove.

<!-- @segment mn91:24.3 -->

The brahmins and householders of Mithilā heard:

<!-- @segment mn91:24.4 -->

“It seems the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—has arrived at Mithilā, where he is staying in the Maghadeva Mango Grove.

<!-- @segment mn91:24.5 -->

He has this good reputation:

<!-- @segment mn91:24.6 -->

‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’

<!-- @segment mn91:24.7 -->

He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others.

<!-- @segment mn91:24.8 -->

He proclaims a teaching that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure.

<!-- @segment mn91:24.9 -->

It’s good to see such perfected ones.”

<!-- @segment mn91:25.1 -->

Then the brahmins and householders of Mithilā went up to the Buddha. Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite conversation, some held up their cupped palms toward the Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent.

<!-- @segment mn91:26.1 -->

The brahmin Brahmāyu also heard that the Buddha had arrived.

<!-- @segment mn91:26.2 -->

So he went to the Maghadeva Mango Grove together with several disciples.

<!-- @segment mn91:26.3 -->

Not far from the grove he thought,

<!-- @segment mn91:26.4 -->

“It wouldn’t be appropriate for me to go to see the ascetic Gotama without letting him know beforehand.”

<!-- @segment mn91:26.5 -->

So he addressed one of his young students:

<!-- @segment mn91:26.6 -->

“Here, young student, go to the ascetic Gotama and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Ask him if he is healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably.

<!-- @segment mn91:26.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn91:26.8 -->

And then say:

<!-- @segment mn91:26.9 -->

‘Worthy Gotama, , the brahmin Brahmāyu is old, elderly, and senior, advanced in years, having reached the final stage of life; he is a hundred and twenty years old. He has mastered the three Vedas, together with their vocabularies and ritual performance, their phonology and word classification, and the testaments as fifth. He knows them word-by-word, and their grammar. He is well versed in cosmology and the marks of a great man.

<!-- @segment mn91:26.10 -->

Of all the brahmins and householders residing in Mithilā, Brahmāyu is said to be the foremost in

<!-- @segment mn91:26.11 -->

wealth,

<!-- @segment mn91:26.12 -->



<!-- @segment mn91:26.13 -->

hymns,

<!-- @segment mn91:26.14 -->



<!-- @segment mn91:26.15 -->

lifespan, and fame.

<!-- @segment mn91:26.16 -->

He wants to see the worthy Gotama.’”

<!-- @segment mn91:26.17 -->

“Yes, worthy sir,” that young student replied. He did as he was asked, and the Buddha said,

<!-- @segment mn91:26.18 -->



<!-- @segment mn91:26.19 -->



<!-- @segment mn91:26.20 -->



<!-- @segment mn91:26.21 -->



<!-- @segment mn91:26.22 -->



<!-- @segment mn91:26.23 -->



<!-- @segment mn91:26.24 -->



<!-- @segment mn91:26.25 -->



<!-- @segment mn91:26.26 -->



<!-- @segment mn91:26.27 -->



<!-- @segment mn91:26.28 -->



<!-- @segment mn91:26.29 -->

“Please, student, let Brahmāyu come when he’s ready.”

<!-- @segment mn91:27.1 -->

The young student went back to Brahmāyu and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn91:27.2 -->

“Your request for an audience with the ascetic Gotama has been granted.

<!-- @segment mn91:27.3 -->

Please go at your convenience.”

<!-- @segment mn91:28.1 -->

Then the brahmin Brahmāyu went up to the Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn91:28.2 -->

The assembly saw him coming off in the distance,

<!-- @segment mn91:28.3 -->

and made way for him, as he was well-known and famous.

<!-- @segment mn91:28.4 -->

Brahmāyu said to that retinue,

<!-- @segment mn91:28.5 -->

“Enough, gentlemen.

<!-- @segment mn91:28.6 -->

Please sit on your own seats.

<!-- @segment mn91:28.7 -->

I shall sit here by the ascetic Gotama.”

<!-- @segment mn91:29.1 -->

Then the brahmin Brahmāyu went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment mn91:29.2 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side,

<!-- @segment mn91:29.3 -->

and scrutinized the Buddha’s body for the thirty-two marks of a great man.

<!-- @segment mn91:29.4 -->

He saw all of them except for two,

<!-- @segment mn91:29.5 -->

which he had doubts about:

<!-- @segment mn91:29.6 -->

whether the private parts are sheathed in a foreskin, and the largeness of the tongue.

<!-- @segment mn91:29.7 -->

Then Brahmāyu addressed the Buddha in verse:

<!-- @segment mn91:29.8 -->

“I have learned of the thirty-two

<!-- @segment mn91:29.9 -->

marks of a great man.

<!-- @segment mn91:29.10 -->

There are two that I don’t see

<!-- @segment mn91:29.11 -->

on the body of the worthy Gotama.

<!-- @segment mn91:29.12 -->

Are the private parts sheathed in a foreskin,

<!-- @segment mn91:29.13 -->

O supreme man?

<!-- @segment mn91:29.14 -->

Though called by a word of the feminine gender,

<!-- @segment mn91:29.15 -->

perhaps your tongue is a manly one?

<!-- @segment mn91:29.16 -->

Perhaps your tongue is large,

<!-- @segment mn91:29.17 -->

as we have been informed.

<!-- @segment mn91:29.18 -->

Please stick it out in its full extent,

<!-- @segment mn91:29.19 -->

and so, O seer, dispel my doubt.

<!-- @segment mn91:29.20 -->

For my welfare and benefit in this life,

<!-- @segment mn91:29.21 -->

and happiness in the next.

<!-- @segment mn91:29.22 -->

And I ask you to grant the opportunity

<!-- @segment mn91:29.23 -->

to ask whatever I desire.”

<!-- @segment mn91:30.1 -->

Then it occurred to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment mn91:30.2 -->

“Brahmāyu sees all the marks except for two,

<!-- @segment mn91:30.3 -->

which he has doubts about:

<!-- @segment mn91:30.4 -->

whether the private parts are sheathed in a foreskin, and the largeness of the tongue.”

<!-- @segment mn91:30.5 -->

So the Buddha used his psychic power to will that Brahmāyu would see his private parts sheathed in a foreskin.

<!-- @segment mn91:30.6 -->

And he stuck out his tongue and stroked back and forth on his ear holes and nostrils, and covered his entire forehead with his tongue.

<!-- @segment mn91:30.7 -->

Then the Buddha replied to Brahmāyu in verse:

<!-- @segment mn91:31.1 -->

“The thirty-two marks of a great man

<!-- @segment mn91:31.2 -->

that you have learned

<!-- @segment mn91:31.3 -->

are all found on my body:

<!-- @segment mn91:31.4 -->

so do not doubt, brahmin.

<!-- @segment mn91:31.5 -->

I have known what should be known,

<!-- @segment mn91:31.6 -->

and developed what should be developed,

<!-- @segment mn91:31.7 -->

and given up what should be given up:

<!-- @segment mn91:31.8 -->

and so, brahmin, I am a Buddha.

<!-- @segment mn91:31.9 -->

For your welfare and benefit in this life,

<!-- @segment mn91:31.10 -->

and happiness in the next:

<!-- @segment mn91:31.11 -->

I grant you the opportunity

<!-- @segment mn91:31.12 -->

to ask whatever you desire.”

<!-- @segment mn91:32.1 -->

Then Brahmāyu thought:

<!-- @segment mn91:32.2 -->

“My request has been granted.

<!-- @segment mn91:32.3 -->

Should I ask him about

<!-- @segment mn91:32.4 -->

what is beneficial in this life or the next?”

<!-- @segment mn91:32.5 -->

Then he thought,

<!-- @segment mn91:32.6 -->

“I’m well versed in the benefits that apply to this life,

<!-- @segment mn91:32.7 -->

and others ask me about this.

<!-- @segment mn91:32.8 -->

Why don’t I ask the ascetic Gotama about the benefit that specifically applies to lives to come?”

<!-- @segment mn91:32.9 -->

So Brahmāyu addressed the Buddha in verse:

<!-- @segment mn91:32.10 -->

“How do you become a brahmin?

<!-- @segment mn91:32.11 -->

And how do you become a knowledge master?

<!-- @segment mn91:32.12 -->

How a master of the three knowledges?

<!-- @segment mn91:32.13 -->

And how is one called a scholar?

<!-- @segment mn91:32.14 -->

How do you become a perfected one?

<!-- @segment mn91:32.15 -->

And how a consummate one?

<!-- @segment mn91:32.16 -->

How do you become a sage?

<!-- @segment mn91:32.17 -->

And how is one declared to be awakened?”

<!-- @segment mn91:33.1 -->

Then the Buddha replied to Brahmāyu in verse:

<!-- @segment mn91:33.2 -->

“One who knows their past lives,

<!-- @segment mn91:33.3 -->

sees heaven and places of loss,

<!-- @segment mn91:33.4 -->

and has attained the end of rebirth:

<!-- @segment mn91:33.5 -->

such a sage has perfect insight.

<!-- @segment mn91:33.6 -->

They know their mind is pure,

<!-- @segment mn91:33.7 -->

completely freed from greed;

<!-- @segment mn91:33.8 -->

they’ve given up birth and death,

<!-- @segment mn91:33.9 -->

and have completed the spiritual journey.

<!-- @segment mn91:33.10 -->

Gone beyond all things,

<!-- @segment mn91:33.11 -->

such a one is declared to be awakened.”

<!-- @segment mn91:34.1 -->

When he said this, Brahmāyu rose from his seat and arranged his robe on one shoulder. He bowed with his head at the Buddha’s feet, caressing them and covering them with kisses, and pronounced his name:

<!-- @segment mn91:34.2 -->

“I am the brahmin Brahmāyu, worthy Gotama!

<!-- @segment mn91:34.3 -->

I am the brahmin Brahmāyu!”

<!-- @segment mn91:35.1 -->

Then that assembly, their minds full of wonder and amazement, thought,

<!-- @segment mn91:35.2 -->

“Oh lord, how incredible, how amazing,

<!-- @segment mn91:35.3 -->

that Brahmāyu, who is so well-known and famous, should show the Buddha such utmost deference.”

<!-- @segment mn91:35.4 -->

Then the Buddha said to Brahmāyu,

<!-- @segment mn91:35.5 -->

“Enough, brahmin. Get up, and sit in your own seat, since your mind has such confidence in me.”

<!-- @segment mn91:35.6 -->

So Brahmāyu got up and sat in his own seat.

<!-- @segment mn91:36.1 -->

Then the Buddha taught him step by step, with

<!-- @segment mn91:36.2 -->

a talk on giving, ethical conduct, and heaven.

<!-- @segment mn91:36.3 -->

He explained the drawbacks of sensual pleasures, so sordid and corrupt, and the benefit of renunciation.

<!-- @segment mn91:36.4 -->

And when the Buddha knew that Brahmāyu’s mind was ready, pliable, rid of hindrances, elated, and confident he explained the special teaching of the Buddhas:

<!-- @segment mn91:36.5 -->

suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.

<!-- @segment mn91:36.6 -->

Just as a clean cloth rid of stains would properly absorb dye,

<!-- @segment mn91:36.7 -->

in that very seat the stainless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in the brahmin Brahmāyu:

<!-- @segment mn91:36.8 -->

“Everything that is liable to arise is liable to cease.”

<!-- @segment mn91:36.9 -->

Then Brahmāyu saw, attained, understood, and fathomed the Dhamma. He went beyond doubt, got rid of indecision, and became self-assured and independent of others regarding the Teacher’s instructions. He said to the Buddha:

<!-- @segment mn91:37.1 -->

“Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent!

<!-- @segment mn91:37.2 -->

As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, worthy Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways.

<!-- @segment mn91:37.3 -->

I go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment mn91:37.4 -->

From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.

<!-- @segment mn91:37.5 -->

Would you and the mendicant Saṅgha please accept tomorrow’s meal from me?”

<!-- @segment mn91:37.6 -->

The Buddha consented with silence.

<!-- @segment mn91:37.7 -->

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, Brahmāyu rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

<!-- @segment mn91:38.1 -->

And when the night had passed Brahmāyu had delicious fresh and cooked foods prepared in his own home. Then he had the Buddha informed of the time, saying,

<!-- @segment mn91:38.2 -->

“It’s time, worthy Gotama, the meal is ready.”

<!-- @segment mn91:38.3 -->

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the home of the brahmin Brahmāyu, where he sat on the seat spread out, together with the Saṅgha of mendicants.

<!-- @segment mn91:38.4 -->

For seven days, Brahmāyu served and satisfied the mendicant Saṅgha headed by the Buddha with his own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods.

<!-- @segment mn91:39.1 -->

When the seven days had passed, the Buddha left to wander in the Videhan lands.

<!-- @segment mn91:39.2 -->

Not long after the Buddha left, Brahmāyu passed away.

<!-- @segment mn91:39.3 -->

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn91:39.4 -->

“Sir, Brahmāyu has passed away.

<!-- @segment mn91:39.5 -->

Where has he been reborn in his next life?”

<!-- @segment mn91:39.6 -->

“Mendicants, the brahmin Brahmāyu was astute. He practiced in line with the teaching, and did not trouble me about the teachings.

<!-- @segment mn91:39.7 -->

With the ending of the five lower fetters, he’s been reborn spontaneously and will become extinguished there, not liable to return from that world.”

<!-- @segment mn91:39.8 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment mn91:39.9 -->

Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said.
