---
slug: mn96
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Esukārī
description: The brahmin Esukārī asks about the four prescribed services according to class; the Buddha teaches that one should serve whoever makes one better, not worse, regardless of birth.
qualities: ethical conduct, examination, wisdom, giving, discernment
theme: cultivating discernment, principle
---

<!-- @segment mn96:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn96:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment mn96:2.1 -->

Then Esukārī the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment mn96:2.2 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

<!-- @segment mn96:3.1 -->

“Worthy Gotama, the brahmins prescribe four kinds of service:

<!-- @segment mn96:3.2 -->

for a brahmin, an aristocrat, a peasant, and a menial.

<!-- @segment mn96:3.3 -->

This is the service they prescribe for a brahmin:

<!-- @segment mn96:3.4 -->

‘A brahmin, an aristocrat, a peasant, and a menial may all serve a brahmin.’

<!-- @segment mn96:3.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn96:3.6 -->

This is the service they prescribe for an aristocrat:

<!-- @segment mn96:3.7 -->

‘An aristocrat, a peasant, and a menial may all serve an aristocrat.’

<!-- @segment mn96:3.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn96:3.9 -->

This is the service they prescribe for a peasant:

<!-- @segment mn96:3.10 -->

‘A peasant or a menial may serve a peasant.’

<!-- @segment mn96:3.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn96:3.12 -->

This is the service they prescribe for a menial:

<!-- @segment mn96:3.13 -->

‘Only a menial may serve a menial.

<!-- @segment mn96:3.14 -->

For who else will serve a menial?’

<!-- @segment mn96:3.15 -->



<!-- @segment mn96:3.16 -->

These are the four kinds of service that the brahmins prescribe.

<!-- @segment mn96:3.17 -->

What do you say about this?”

<!-- @segment mn96:4.1 -->

“But brahmin, did the whole world authorize the brahmins to prescribe these four kinds of service?”

<!-- @segment mn96:4.2 -->

“No, worthy Gotama.”

<!-- @segment mn96:4.3 -->

“It’s as if they were to force a chop on a poor, penniless person, telling them, ‘Eat this meat and pay for it!’

<!-- @segment mn96:4.4 -->

In the same way, the brahmins have prescribed these four kinds of service without the consent of those ascetics and brahmins.

<!-- @segment mn96:5.1 -->

Brahmin, I don’t say that you should serve everyone, nor do I say that you shouldn’t serve anyone.

<!-- @segment mn96:5.2 -->

I say that you shouldn’t serve someone if serving them makes you worse, not better.

<!-- @segment mn96:5.3 -->

And I say that you should serve someone if serving them makes you better, not worse.

<!-- @segment mn96:6.1 -->

If they were to ask an aristocrat this,

<!-- @segment mn96:6.2 -->

‘Who should you serve? Someone in whose service you get worse, or someone in whose service you get better?’

<!-- @segment mn96:6.3 -->

Answering rightly, an aristocrat would say,

<!-- @segment mn96:6.4 -->

‘Someone in whose service I get better.’

<!-- @segment mn96:7.1 -->

If they were to ask a brahmin …

<!-- @segment mn96:7.2 -->

a peasant …

<!-- @segment mn96:7.3 -->

or a menial this,

<!-- @segment mn96:7.4 -->

‘Who should you serve? Someone in whose service you get worse, or someone in whose service you get better?’

<!-- @segment mn96:7.5 -->

Answering rightly, a menial would say,

<!-- @segment mn96:7.6 -->

‘Someone in whose service I get better.’

<!-- @segment mn96:7.7 -->

Brahmin, I don’t say that an eminent family makes you a better or worse person.

<!-- @segment mn96:7.8 -->

I don’t say that being very beautiful makes you a better or worse person.

<!-- @segment mn96:7.9 -->

I don’t say that being very wealthy makes you a better or worse person.

<!-- @segment mn96:8.1 -->

For some people from eminent families kill living creatures, steal, and commit sexual misconduct. They use speech that’s false, backbiting, harsh, or nonsensical. And they’re covetous, malicious, with wrong view.

<!-- @segment mn96:8.2 -->

That’s why I don’t say that an eminent family makes you an even truer person.

<!-- @segment mn96:8.3 -->

But some people from eminent families also refrain from killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct. They refrain from using speech that’s false, backbiting, harsh, or nonsensical. And they’re not covetous or malicious, and they have right view.

<!-- @segment mn96:8.4 -->

That’s why I don’t say that an eminent family makes you a worse person.

<!-- @segment mn96:8.5 -->

People who are very beautiful,

<!-- @segment mn96:8.6 -->

or not very beautiful,

<!-- @segment mn96:8.7 -->

who are very wealthy,

<!-- @segment mn96:8.8 -->

or not very wealthy,

<!-- @segment mn96:8.9 -->

may also behave in the same ways.

<!-- @segment mn96:8.10 -->

That’s why I don’t say that any of these things makes you a better or worse person.

<!-- @segment mn96:8.11 -->



<!-- @segment mn96:8.12 -->



<!-- @segment mn96:9.1 -->

Brahmin, I don’t say that you should serve everyone, nor do I say that you shouldn’t serve anyone.

<!-- @segment mn96:9.2 -->

And I say that you should serve someone if serving them makes you grow in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom.

<!-- @segment mn96:9.3 -->

I say that you shouldn’t serve someone if serving them doesn’t make you grow in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom.”

<!-- @segment mn96:10.1 -->

When he had spoken, Esukārī said to him:

<!-- @segment mn96:10.2 -->

“Worthy Gotama, the brahmins prescribe four kinds of wealth:

<!-- @segment mn96:10.3 -->

for a brahmin, an aristocrat, a peasant, and a menial.

<!-- @segment mn96:10.4 -->

The wealth they prescribe for a brahmin is living on alms.

<!-- @segment mn96:10.5 -->

A brahmin who scorns his own wealth, living on alms, fails in his duty like a guard who steals.

<!-- @segment mn96:10.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn96:10.7 -->

The wealth they prescribe for an aristocrat is the bow and quiver.

<!-- @segment mn96:10.8 -->

An aristocrat who scorns his own wealth, the bow and quiver, fails in his duty like a guard who steals.

<!-- @segment mn96:10.9 -->



<!-- @segment mn96:10.10 -->

The wealth they prescribe for a peasant is farming and animal husbandry.

<!-- @segment mn96:10.11 -->

A peasant who scorns his own wealth, farming and animal husbandry, fails in his duty like a guard who steals.

<!-- @segment mn96:10.12 -->



<!-- @segment mn96:10.13 -->

The wealth they prescribe for a menial is the scythe and flail.

<!-- @segment mn96:10.14 -->

A menial who scorns his own wealth, the scythe and flail, fails in his duty like a guard who steals.

<!-- @segment mn96:10.15 -->



<!-- @segment mn96:10.16 -->

These are the four kinds of wealth that the brahmins prescribe.

<!-- @segment mn96:10.17 -->

What do you say about this?”

<!-- @segment mn96:11.1 -->

“But brahmin, did the whole world authorize the brahmins to prescribe these four kinds of wealth?”

<!-- @segment mn96:11.2 -->

“No, worthy Gotama.”

<!-- @segment mn96:11.3 -->

“It’s as if they were to force a chop on a poor, penniless person, telling them, ‘Eat this meat and pay for it!’

<!-- @segment mn96:11.4 -->

In the same way, the brahmins have prescribed these four kinds of wealth without the consent of these ascetics and brahmins.

<!-- @segment mn96:12.1 -->

I declare that a person’s own wealth is the noble, transcendent teaching.

<!-- @segment mn96:12.2 -->

But they are reckoned by recollecting the traditional family lineage of their mother and father wherever they are incarnated.

<!-- @segment mn96:12.3 -->

If they incarnate in a family of aristocrats they are reckoned as an aristocrat.

<!-- @segment mn96:12.4 -->

If they incarnate in a family of brahmins they are reckoned as a brahmin.

<!-- @segment mn96:12.5 -->

If they incarnate in a family of peasants they are reckoned as a peasant.

<!-- @segment mn96:12.6 -->

If they incarnate in a family of menials they are reckoned as a menial.

<!-- @segment mn96:12.7 -->

It’s like fire, which is reckoned according to the very same condition dependent upon which it burns.

<!-- @segment mn96:12.8 -->

A fire that burns dependent on logs is reckoned as a log fire.

<!-- @segment mn96:12.9 -->

A fire that burns dependent on twigs is reckoned as a twig fire.

<!-- @segment mn96:12.10 -->

A fire that burns dependent on grass is reckoned as a grass fire.

<!-- @segment mn96:12.11 -->

A fire that burns dependent on cow-dung is reckoned as a cow-dung fire.

<!-- @segment mn96:12.12 -->

In the same way, I declare that a person’s own wealth is the noble, transcendent teaching.

<!-- @segment mn96:12.13 -->

But they are reckoned by recollecting the traditional family lineage of their mother and father wherever they are incarnated.

<!-- @segment mn96:12.14 -->



<!-- @segment mn96:12.15 -->



<!-- @segment mn96:12.16 -->



<!-- @segment mn96:12.17 -->



<!-- @segment mn96:13.1 -->

Suppose someone from a family of aristocrats goes forth from the lay life to homelessness. Relying on the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One they refrain from killing living creatures, stealing, and sex. They refrain from using speech that’s false, backbiting, harsh, or nonsensical. And they’re not covetous or malicious, and they have right view. They succeed in the system of the skillful teaching.

<!-- @segment mn96:13.2 -->

Suppose someone from a family of brahmins …

<!-- @segment mn96:13.3 -->

peasants …

<!-- @segment mn96:13.4 -->

menials goes forth from the lay life to homelessness. Relying on the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One … they succeed in the system of the skillful teaching.

<!-- @segment mn96:14.1 -->

What do you think, brahmin?

<!-- @segment mn96:14.2 -->

Is only a brahmin capable of developing a heart of love free of enmity and ill will for this region, and not an aristocrat, peasant, or menial?”

<!-- @segment mn96:14.3 -->

“No, worthy Gotama.

<!-- @segment mn96:14.4 -->

Aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and menials can all do so.

<!-- @segment mn96:14.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn96:14.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn96:14.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn96:14.8 -->

For all four classes are capable of developing a heart of love free of enmity and ill will for this region.”

<!-- @segment mn96:14.9 -->

“In the same way, suppose someone from a family of aristocrats,

<!-- @segment mn96:14.10 -->

brahmins,

<!-- @segment mn96:14.11 -->

peasants,

<!-- @segment mn96:14.12 -->

or menials goes forth from the lay life to homelessness. Relying on the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One … they succeed in the system of the skillful teaching.

<!-- @segment mn96:15.1 -->

What do you think, brahmin?

<!-- @segment mn96:15.2 -->

Is only a brahmin capable of taking some bathing cleanser, going to the river, and rinsing off dust and dirt, and not an aristocrat, peasant, or menial?”

<!-- @segment mn96:15.3 -->

“No, worthy Gotama.

<!-- @segment mn96:15.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn96:15.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn96:15.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn96:15.7 -->



<!-- @segment mn96:15.8 -->

All four classes are capable of doing this.”

<!-- @segment mn96:15.9 -->

“In the same way, suppose someone from a family of aristocrats,

<!-- @segment mn96:15.10 -->

brahmins,

<!-- @segment mn96:15.11 -->

peasants,

<!-- @segment mn96:15.12 -->

or menials goes forth from the lay life to homelessness. Relying on the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One … they succeed in the system of the skillful teaching.

<!-- @segment mn96:16.1 -->

What do you think, brahmin?

<!-- @segment mn96:16.2 -->

Suppose an anointed aristocratic king were to gather a hundred people born in different classes and say to them:

<!-- @segment mn96:16.3 -->

‘Please gentlemen, let anyone here who was born in a family of aristocrats, brahmins, or chieftains take a drill-stick made of teak, sal, <i lang='pi' translate='no'>salaḷa</i>, sandalwood, or cherry wood, light a fire and produce heat.

<!-- @segment mn96:16.4 -->

And let anyone here who was born in a family of corpse-workers, hunters, bamboo-workers, chariot-makers, or scavengers take a drill-stick made from a dog’s drinking trough, a pig’s trough, a dustbin, or castor-oil wood, light a fire and produce heat.’

<!-- @segment mn96:16.5 -->

What do you think, brahmin?

<!-- @segment mn96:16.6 -->

Would only the fire produced by the high class people with good quality wood have flames, color, and radiance, and be usable as fire,

<!-- @segment mn96:16.7 -->

and not the fire produced by the low class people with poor quality wood?”

<!-- @segment mn96:16.8 -->

“No, worthy Gotama.

<!-- @segment mn96:16.9 -->

The fire produced by the high class people with good quality wood would have flames, color, and radiance, and be usable as fire,

<!-- @segment mn96:16.10 -->

and so would the fire produced by the low class people with poor quality wood.

<!-- @segment mn96:16.11 -->

For all fire has flames, color, and radiance, and is usable as fire.”

<!-- @segment mn96:16.12 -->

“In the same way, suppose someone from a family of aristocrats,

<!-- @segment mn96:16.13 -->

brahmins,

<!-- @segment mn96:16.14 -->

peasants,

<!-- @segment mn96:16.15 -->

or menials goes forth from the lay life to homelessness. Relying on the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One they refrain from killing living creatures, stealing, and sex. They refrain from using speech that’s false, backbiting, harsh, or nonsensical. And they’re not covetous or malicious, and they have right view. They succeed in the system of the skillful teaching.”

<!-- @segment mn96:17.1 -->

When he had spoken, Esukārī said to him,

<!-- @segment mn96:17.2 -->

“Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! …

<!-- @segment mn96:17.3 -->

From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”
