---
slug: mn99
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Subha
---

<!-- @segment mn99:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment mn99:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment mn99:2.1 -->

Now at that time the student Subha, Todeyya’s son, was residing in Sāvatthī at a certain householder’s home on some business.

<!-- @segment mn99:2.2 -->

Then Subha said to that householder,

<!-- @segment mn99:2.3 -->

“Householder, I have heard that

<!-- @segment mn99:2.4 -->

Sāvatthī does not lack for perfected ones.

<!-- @segment mn99:2.5 -->

What ascetic or brahmin might we pay homage to today?”

<!-- @segment mn99:2.6 -->

“Sir, the Buddha is staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment mn99:2.7 -->

You can pay homage to him.”

<!-- @segment mn99:3.1 -->

Acknowledging that householder, Subha went to the Buddha and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment mn99:3.2 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

<!-- @segment mn99:4.1 -->

“Worthy Gotama, the brahmins say:

<!-- @segment mn99:4.2 -->

‘Laypeople succeed in the system of the skillful teaching, not renunciates.’

<!-- @segment mn99:4.3 -->

What do you say about this?”

<!-- @segment mn99:4.4 -->

“On this point, student, I speak after analyzing the question,

<!-- @segment mn99:4.5 -->

not one-sidedly.

<!-- @segment mn99:4.6 -->

I don’t praise wrong practice for either laypeople or renunciates.

<!-- @segment mn99:4.7 -->

Because of wrong practice, neither laypeople nor renunciates succeed in the system of the skillful teaching.

<!-- @segment mn99:4.8 -->

I praise right practice for both laypeople and renunciates.

<!-- @segment mn99:4.9 -->

Because of right practice, both laypeople and renunciates succeed in the system of the skillful teaching.”

<!-- @segment mn99:5.1 -->

“Worthy Gotama, the brahmins say:

<!-- @segment mn99:5.2 -->

‘Since the work of the lay life has many obligations, duties, issues, and undertakings it is very fruitful.

<!-- @segment mn99:5.3 -->

But since the work of the renunciate has few obligations, duties, issues, and undertakings it is not very fruitful.’

<!-- @segment mn99:5.4 -->

What do you say about this?”

<!-- @segment mn99:5.5 -->

“On this point, too, I speak after analyzing the question,

<!-- @segment mn99:5.6 -->

not one-sidedly.

<!-- @segment mn99:5.7 -->

Some work has many obligations, duties, issues, and undertakings, and when it fails it’s not very fruitful.

<!-- @segment mn99:5.8 -->

Some work has many obligations, duties, issues, and undertakings, and when it succeeds it is very fruitful.

<!-- @segment mn99:5.9 -->

Some work has few obligations, duties, issues, and undertakings, and when it fails it’s not very fruitful.

<!-- @segment mn99:5.10 -->

Some work has few obligations, duties, issues, and undertakings, and when it succeeds it is very fruitful.

<!-- @segment mn99:6.1 -->

And what work has many obligations, duties, issues, and undertakings, and when it fails it’s not very fruitful?

<!-- @segment mn99:6.2 -->

Farming.

<!-- @segment mn99:6.3 -->

And what work has many obligations, duties, issues, and undertakings, and when it succeeds it is very fruitful?

<!-- @segment mn99:6.4 -->

Again, it is farming.

<!-- @segment mn99:6.5 -->

And what work has few obligations, duties, issues, and undertakings, and when it fails it’s not very fruitful?

<!-- @segment mn99:6.6 -->

Trade.

<!-- @segment mn99:6.7 -->

And what work has few obligations, duties, issues, and undertakings, and when it succeeds it is very fruitful?

<!-- @segment mn99:6.8 -->

Again, it’s trade.

<!-- @segment mn99:7.1 -->

The lay life is like farming in that it’s work with many obligations and when it fails it’s not very fruitful;

<!-- @segment mn99:7.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn99:7.3 -->

but when it succeeds it is very fruitful.

<!-- @segment mn99:7.4 -->



<!-- @segment mn99:7.5 -->

The renunciate life is like trade in that it’s work with few obligations and when it fails it’s not very fruitful;

<!-- @segment mn99:7.6 -->



<!-- @segment mn99:7.7 -->

but when it succeeds it is very fruitful.”

<!-- @segment mn99:7.8 -->



<!-- @segment mn99:8.1 -->

“Worthy Gotama, the brahmins prescribe five things for making merit and succeeding in the skillful.”

<!-- @segment mn99:8.2 -->



<!-- @segment mn99:8.3 -->

“If you don’t mind,

<!-- @segment mn99:8.4 -->

please explain these in this assembly.”

<!-- @segment mn99:8.5 -->

“It’s no trouble when good fellows such as yourself are sitting here.”

<!-- @segment mn99:8.6 -->

“Well, speak then, student.”

<!-- @segment mn99:9.1 -->

“Worthy Gotama, truth is the first thing.

<!-- @segment mn99:9.2 -->

Fervor is the second thing.

<!-- @segment mn99:9.3 -->

Chastity is the third thing.

<!-- @segment mn99:9.4 -->

Recitation is the fourth thing.

<!-- @segment mn99:9.5 -->

Generosity is the fifth thing.

<!-- @segment mn99:9.6 -->

These are the five things that the brahmins prescribe for making merit and succeeding in the skillful.

<!-- @segment mn99:9.7 -->

What do you say about this?”

<!-- @segment mn99:9.8 -->

“Well, student, is there even a single one of the brahmins who says this:

<!-- @segment mn99:9.9 -->

‘I declare the result of these five things after realizing it with my own insight’?”

<!-- @segment mn99:9.10 -->

“No, worthy Gotama.”

<!-- @segment mn99:9.11 -->

“Well, is there even a single tutor of the brahmins, or a tutor’s tutor, or anyone back to the seventh generation of tutors, who says this:

<!-- @segment mn99:9.12 -->

‘I declare the result of these five things after realizing it with my own insight’?”

<!-- @segment mn99:9.13 -->

“No, worthy Gotama.”

<!-- @segment mn99:9.14 -->

“Well, what of the ancient seers of the brahmins, namely Aṭṭhaka, Vāmaka, Vāmadeva, Vessāmitta, Yamadaggi, Aṅgīrasa, Bhāradvāja, Vāseṭṭha, Kassapa, and Bhagu? They were the authors and propagators of the hymns. Their hymnal was sung and propagated and compiled in ancient times; and these days, brahmins continue to sing and chant it, chanting what was chanted and teaching what was taught.

<!-- @segment mn99:9.15 -->

Did even they say:

<!-- @segment mn99:9.16 -->

‘We declare the result of these five things after realizing it with our own insight’?”

<!-- @segment mn99:9.17 -->

“No, worthy Gotama.”

<!-- @segment mn99:9.18 -->

“So, student, it seems that there is not a single one of the brahmins,

<!-- @segment mn99:9.19 -->



<!-- @segment mn99:9.20 -->

not even anyone back to the seventh generation of tutors,

<!-- @segment mn99:9.21 -->



<!-- @segment mn99:9.22 -->

nor even the ancient seers of the brahmins

<!-- @segment mn99:9.23 -->

who says:

<!-- @segment mn99:9.24 -->

‘We declare the result of these five things after realizing it with our own insight.’

<!-- @segment mn99:9.25 -->

Suppose there was a queue of blind men, each holding the one in front: the first one does not see, the middle one does not see, and the last one does not see.

<!-- @segment mn99:9.26 -->

In the same way, it seems to me that the brahmins’ statement turns out to be comparable to a queue of blind men: the first one does not see, the middle one does not see, and the last one does not see.”

<!-- @segment mn99:10.1 -->

When he said this, Subha became angry and upset with the Buddha because of the simile of the queue of blind men. He even attacked and badmouthed the Buddha himself, saying,

<!-- @segment mn99:10.2 -->

“The ascetic Gotama will be worsted!” He said to the Buddha:

<!-- @segment mn99:10.3 -->

“Worthy Gotama, the brahmin Pokkharasāti Upamañña of the Subhaga Forest says:

<!-- @segment mn99:10.4 -->

‘This is exactly what happens with some ascetics and brahmins. They claim to have a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.

<!-- @segment mn99:10.5 -->

But their statement turns out to be a joke—mere words, vacuous and hollow.

<!-- @segment mn99:10.6 -->

For how on earth can a human being know or see or realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones?

<!-- @segment mn99:10.7 -->

That is not possible.’”

<!-- @segment mn99:11.1 -->

“But student, does Pokkharasāti understand the minds of all these ascetics and brahmins, having encompassed them with his mind?”

<!-- @segment mn99:11.2 -->

“Worthy Gotama, Pokkharasāti doesn’t even know the mind of his own bonded maid Puṇṇikā, so how could he know all those ascetics and brahmins?”

<!-- @segment mn99:12.1 -->

“Suppose there was a person blind from birth. They couldn’t see sights that are dark or bright, or blue, yellow, red, or magenta. They couldn’t see even and uneven ground, or the stars, or the moon and sun.

<!-- @segment mn99:12.2 -->

They’d say:

<!-- @segment mn99:12.3 -->

‘There’s no such thing as dark and bright sights, and no-one who sees them.

<!-- @segment mn99:12.4 -->

There’s no such thing as blue,

<!-- @segment mn99:12.5 -->

yellow,

<!-- @segment mn99:12.6 -->

red,

<!-- @segment mn99:12.7 -->

magenta,

<!-- @segment mn99:12.8 -->

even and uneven ground,

<!-- @segment mn99:12.9 -->

stars,

<!-- @segment mn99:12.10 -->

moon and sun, and no-one who sees these things.

<!-- @segment mn99:12.11 -->

I don’t know it or see it,

<!-- @segment mn99:12.12 -->

therefore it doesn’t exist.’

<!-- @segment mn99:12.13 -->

Would they be speaking rightly?”

<!-- @segment mn99:12.14 -->

“No, worthy Gotama.

<!-- @segment mn99:12.15 -->

There are such things as dark and bright sights, and one who sees them.

<!-- @segment mn99:12.16 -->

There is blue,

<!-- @segment mn99:12.17 -->

yellow,

<!-- @segment mn99:12.18 -->

red,

<!-- @segment mn99:12.19 -->

magenta,

<!-- @segment mn99:12.20 -->

even and uneven ground,

<!-- @segment mn99:12.21 -->

stars,

<!-- @segment mn99:12.22 -->

moon and sun, and one who sees these things.

<!-- @segment mn99:12.23 -->

So it’s not right to say this: ‘I don’t know it or see it,

<!-- @segment mn99:12.24 -->

therefore it doesn’t exist.’”

<!-- @segment mn99:12.25 -->



<!-- @segment mn99:13.1 -->

“In the same way, Pokkharasāti is blind and sightless.

<!-- @segment mn99:13.2 -->

It is quite impossible for him to know or see or realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.

<!-- @segment mn99:13.3 -->

What do you think, student?

<!-- @segment mn99:13.4 -->

There are well-to-do brahmins of Kosala such as

<!-- @segment mn99:13.5 -->

the brahmins Caṅkī, Tārukkha, Pokkharasāti, Jānussoṇi, and your father Todeyya. What’s better for them: that their speech agrees or disagrees with the consensus of opinion?”

<!-- @segment mn99:13.6 -->

“That it agrees, worthy Gotama.”

<!-- @segment mn99:13.7 -->

“What’s better for them: that their speech is thoughtful or thoughtless?”

<!-- @segment mn99:13.8 -->

“That it is thoughtful.”

<!-- @segment mn99:13.9 -->

“What’s better for them: that their speech follows reflection or is unreflective?”

<!-- @segment mn99:13.10 -->

“That it follows reflection.”

<!-- @segment mn99:13.11 -->

“What’s better for them: that their speech is beneficial or worthless?”

<!-- @segment mn99:13.12 -->

“That it’s beneficial.”

<!-- @segment mn99:14.1 -->

“What do you think, student?

<!-- @segment mn99:14.2 -->

If this is so, does Pokkharasāti’s speech agree or disagree with the consensus of opinion?”

<!-- @segment mn99:14.3 -->

“It disagrees, worthy Gotama.”

<!-- @segment mn99:14.4 -->

“Is it thoughtful or thoughtless?”

<!-- @segment mn99:14.5 -->

“Thoughtless.”

<!-- @segment mn99:14.6 -->

“Is it reflective or unreflective?”

<!-- @segment mn99:14.7 -->

“Unreflective.”

<!-- @segment mn99:14.8 -->

“Is it beneficial or worthless?”

<!-- @segment mn99:14.9 -->

“Worthless.”

<!-- @segment mn99:15.1 -->

“Student, there are these five hindrances.

<!-- @segment mn99:15.2 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment mn99:15.3 -->

The hindrances of sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt.

<!-- @segment mn99:15.4 -->

These are the five hindrances.

<!-- @segment mn99:15.5 -->

Pokkharasāti is obstructed, hindered, engulfed, and enveloped by these five hindrances.

<!-- @segment mn99:15.6 -->

It is quite impossible for him to know or see or realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.

<!-- @segment mn99:16.1 -->

There are these five kinds of sensual stimulation.

<!-- @segment mn99:16.2 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment mn99:16.3 -->

There are sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing.

<!-- @segment mn99:16.4 -->

There are sounds known by the ear …

<!-- @segment mn99:16.5 -->

smells known by the nose …

<!-- @segment mn99:16.6 -->

tastes known by the tongue …

<!-- @segment mn99:16.7 -->

touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing.

<!-- @segment mn99:16.8 -->

These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

<!-- @segment mn99:16.9 -->

Pokkharasāti enjoys himself with these five kinds of sensual stimulation, tied, infatuated, attached, blind to the drawbacks, and not understanding the escape.

<!-- @segment mn99:16.10 -->

It is quite impossible for him to know or see or realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.

<!-- @segment mn99:17.1 -->

What do you think, student?

<!-- @segment mn99:17.2 -->

Which would have better flames, color, and radiance: a fire that depends on grass and logs as fuel, or one that does not?”

<!-- @segment mn99:17.3 -->

“If it were possible for a fire to burn without depending on grass and logs as fuel, that would have better flames, color, and radiance.”

<!-- @segment mn99:17.4 -->

“But it isn’t possible, except by psychic power.

<!-- @segment mn99:17.5 -->

Rapture that depends on the five kinds of sensual stimulation is like a fire that depends on grass and logs as fuel.

<!-- @segment mn99:17.6 -->

Rapture that’s apart from sensual pleasures and unskillful qualities is like a fire that doesn’t depend on grass and logs as fuel.

<!-- @segment mn99:17.7 -->

And what is rapture that’s apart from sensual pleasures and unskillful qualities?

<!-- @segment mn99:17.8 -->

It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment mn99:17.9 -->

This is rapture that’s apart from sensual pleasures and unskillful qualities.

<!-- @segment mn99:17.10 -->

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment mn99:17.11 -->

This too is rapture that’s apart from sensual pleasures and unskillful qualities.

<!-- @segment mn99:18.1 -->

Of the five things that the brahmins prescribe for making merit and succeeding in the skillful, which do they say is the most fruitful?”

<!-- @segment mn99:18.2 -->

“Generosity.”

<!-- @segment mn99:19.1 -->

“What do you think, student?

<!-- @segment mn99:19.2 -->

Suppose a brahmin was setting up a big sacrifice.

<!-- @segment mn99:19.3 -->

Then two brahmins came along,

<!-- @segment mn99:19.4 -->

thinking to participate.

<!-- @segment mn99:19.5 -->

Then one of those brahmins thought:

<!-- @segment mn99:19.6 -->

‘Oh, I hope that I alone get the best seat, the best drink, and the best almsfood in the refectory, not some other brahmin.’

<!-- @segment mn99:19.7 -->

But it’s possible that some other brahmin gets the best seat, the best drink, and the best almsfood in the refectory.

<!-- @segment mn99:19.8 -->

Thinking, ‘Some other brahmin has got the best seat, the best drink, the best almsfood,’

<!-- @segment mn99:19.9 -->

they get angry and bitter.

<!-- @segment mn99:19.10 -->

What do the brahmins say is the result of this?”

<!-- @segment mn99:19.11 -->

“Worthy Gotama, brahmins don’t give gifts so that

<!-- @segment mn99:19.12 -->

others will get angry and upset.

<!-- @segment mn99:19.13 -->

Rather, they give only out of sympathy.”

<!-- @segment mn99:19.14 -->

“In that case, isn’t compassion a sixth ground for making merit?”

<!-- @segment mn99:19.15 -->



<!-- @segment mn99:19.16 -->

“In that case, compassion is a sixth ground for making merit.”

<!-- @segment mn99:19.17 -->



<!-- @segment mn99:20.1 -->

“Of the five things that the brahmins prescribe for making merit and succeeding in the skillful, where do you usually find them:

<!-- @segment mn99:20.2 -->

among laypeople or renunciates?”

<!-- @segment mn99:20.3 -->

“Mostly among renunciates, and less so among lay people.

<!-- @segment mn99:20.4 -->

For a layperson has many obligations, duties, issues, and undertakings, and they can’t always tell the truth,

<!-- @segment mn99:20.5 -->



<!-- @segment mn99:20.6 -->

be fervent,

<!-- @segment mn99:20.7 -->

be chaste,

<!-- @segment mn99:20.8 -->

rehearse a lot,

<!-- @segment mn99:20.9 -->

or be very generous.

<!-- @segment mn99:20.10 -->

But a renunciate has few obligations, duties, issues, and undertakings, and they can always tell the truth, be fervent,

<!-- @segment mn99:20.11 -->

be chaste,

<!-- @segment mn99:20.12 -->

rehearse a lot,

<!-- @segment mn99:20.13 -->

and be very generous.

<!-- @segment mn99:20.14 -->

Of the five things that the brahmins prescribe for making merit and succeeding in the skillful, I usually find them among renunciates, and less so among laypeople.”

<!-- @segment mn99:21.1 -->

“I say that the five things prescribed by the brahmins for making merit are prerequisites of the mind for

<!-- @segment mn99:21.2 -->

developing a mind free of enmity and ill will.

<!-- @segment mn99:21.3 -->

Take a mendicant who speaks the truth.

<!-- @segment mn99:21.4 -->

Thinking, ‘I’m truthful,’ they find inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and find joy connected with the teaching.

<!-- @segment mn99:21.5 -->

And I say that joy connected with the skillful is a prerequisite of the mind for

<!-- @segment mn99:21.6 -->

developing a mind free of enmity and ill will.

<!-- @segment mn99:21.7 -->

Take a mendicant who is fervent …

<!-- @segment mn99:21.8 -->

is chaste …

<!-- @segment mn99:21.9 -->

rehearses a lot …

<!-- @segment mn99:21.10 -->

and is very generous.

<!-- @segment mn99:21.11 -->

Thinking, ‘I’m very generous,’ they find inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and find joy connected with the teaching.

<!-- @segment mn99:21.12 -->

And I say that joy connected with the skillful is a prerequisite of the mind for

<!-- @segment mn99:21.13 -->

developing a mind free of enmity and ill will.

<!-- @segment mn99:21.14 -->

I say that these five things prescribed by the brahmins for making merit are prerequisites of the mind for

<!-- @segment mn99:21.15 -->

developing a mind free of enmity and ill will.”

<!-- @segment mn99:22.1 -->

When he had spoken, Subha said to him,

<!-- @segment mn99:22.2 -->

“Worthy Gotama, I have heard that

<!-- @segment mn99:22.3 -->

the ascetic Gotama knows a path to company with divinity.”

<!-- @segment mn99:22.4 -->

“What do you think, student?

<!-- @segment mn99:22.5 -->

Is the village of Naḷakāra nearby?”

<!-- @segment mn99:22.6 -->

“Yes it is, sir.”

<!-- @segment mn99:22.7 -->

“What do you think, student? Suppose a person was born and raised in Naḷakāra.

<!-- @segment mn99:22.8 -->

And as soon as they left the town some people asked them for the road to Naḷakāra.

<!-- @segment mn99:22.9 -->

Would they be slow or hesitant to answer?”

<!-- @segment mn99:22.10 -->

“No, worthy Gotama.

<!-- @segment mn99:22.11 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment mn99:22.12 -->

Because they were born and raised in Naḷakāra. They’re well acquainted with all the roads to the village.”

<!-- @segment mn99:22.13 -->

“Still, it’s possible they might be slow or hesitant to answer. But the Realized One is never slow or hesitant when questioned about the realm of divinity or the practice that leads to the realm of divinity.

<!-- @segment mn99:22.14 -->

I understand divinity, the realm of divinity, and the practice that leads to the realm of divinity, practicing in accordance with which one is reborn in the realm of divinity.”

<!-- @segment mn99:23.1 -->

“Worthy Gotama, I have heard that

<!-- @segment mn99:23.2 -->

the ascetic Gotama teaches a path to company with divinity.

<!-- @segment mn99:23.3 -->

Please teach me that path.”

<!-- @segment mn99:23.4 -->

“Well then, student, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment mn99:23.5 -->

“Yes, worthy sir,” replied Subha.

<!-- @segment mn99:23.6 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment mn99:24.1 -->

“And what is a path to company with divinity?

<!-- @segment mn99:24.2 -->

Firstly, a mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.

<!-- @segment mn99:24.3 -->

When the heart’s release by love has been developed like this, any limited deeds they’ve done don’t remain or persist there.

<!-- @segment mn99:24.4 -->

Suppose there was a powerful horn blower. They’d easily make themselves heard in the four quarters.

<!-- @segment mn99:24.5 -->

In the same way, when the heart’s release by love has been developed like this, any limited deeds they’ve done don’t remain or persist there.

<!-- @segment mn99:24.6 -->

This is a path to company with divinity.

<!-- @segment mn99:25-27.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of compassion …

<!-- @segment mn99:25-27.2 -->

They meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing …

<!-- @segment mn99:25-27.3 -->

They meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.

<!-- @segment mn99:25-27.4 -->

When the heart’s release by equanimity has been developed and cultivated like this, any limited deeds they’ve done don’t remain or persist there.

<!-- @segment mn99:25-27.5 -->

Suppose there was a powerful horn blower. They’d easily make themselves heard in the four quarters.

<!-- @segment mn99:25-27.6 -->

In the same way, when the heart’s release by equanimity has been developed and cultivated like this, any limited deeds they’ve done don’t remain or persist there.

<!-- @segment mn99:25-27.7 -->

This too is a path to company with divinity.”

<!-- @segment mn99:28.1 -->

When he had spoken, Subha said to him,

<!-- @segment mn99:28.2 -->

“Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent!

<!-- @segment mn99:28.3 -->

As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, worthy Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways.

<!-- @segment mn99:28.4 -->

I go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment mn99:28.5 -->

From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.

<!-- @segment mn99:28.6 -->

Well, now, worthy Gotama, I must go.

<!-- @segment mn99:28.7 -->

I have many duties, and much to do.”

<!-- @segment mn99:29.1 -->

“Please, student, go at your convenience.”

<!-- @segment mn99:29.2 -->

And then Subha approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. He rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

<!-- @segment mn99:30.1 -->

Now at that time the brahmin Jānussoṇi drove out from Sāvatthī in the middle of the day in an all-white chariot drawn by mares.

<!-- @segment mn99:30.2 -->

He saw the student Subha coming off in the distance,

<!-- @segment mn99:30.3 -->

and said to him,

<!-- @segment mn99:30.4 -->

“So, worthy Bhāradvāja, where are you coming from in the middle of the day?”

<!-- @segment mn99:30.5 -->

“Just now, good fellow, I’ve come from the presence of the ascetic Gotama.”

<!-- @segment mn99:30.6 -->

“What do you think of the ascetic Gotama’s lucidity of wisdom? Do you think he’s astute?”

<!-- @segment mn99:30.7 -->

“Mister, who am I to judge the ascetic Gotama’s lucidity of wisdom?

<!-- @segment mn99:30.8 -->

You’d really have to be on the same level to judge his lucidity of wisdom.”

<!-- @segment mn99:30.9 -->

“Mister Bhāradvāja praises the ascetic Gotama with high praise indeed.”

<!-- @segment mn99:30.10 -->

“Who am I to praise the ascetic Gotama?

<!-- @segment mn99:30.11 -->

He is praised by the praised as the best among gods and humans.

<!-- @segment mn99:30.12 -->

The five things that the brahmins prescribe for making merit and succeeding in the skillful

<!-- @segment mn99:30.13 -->

he says are prerequisites of the mind for

<!-- @segment mn99:30.14 -->

developing a mind free of enmity and ill will.”

<!-- @segment mn99:31.1 -->

When he had spoken, Jānussoṇi got down from his chariot, arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his cupped palms toward the Buddha, and expressed this heartfelt sentiment three times,

<!-- @segment mn99:31.2 -->

“King Pasenadi of Kosala is lucky, so very lucky

<!-- @segment mn99:31.3 -->

that the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha is living in his realm!”
