---
slug: iti112
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Chapter on the Brahmin’s Offering of the Teaching
---

<!-- @segment iti112:1.1 -->

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

<!-- @segment iti112:2.1 -->

“Mendicants, the world has been understood by the Realized One;

<!-- @segment iti112:2.2 -->

and he is detached from the world.

<!-- @segment iti112:2.3 -->

The origin of the world has been understood by the Realized One;

<!-- @segment iti112:2.4 -->

and he has given up the origin of the world.

<!-- @segment iti112:2.5 -->

The cessation of the world has been understood by the Realized One;

<!-- @segment iti112:2.6 -->

and he has realized the cessation of the world.

<!-- @segment iti112:2.7 -->

The practice that leads to the cessation of the world has been understood by the Realized One;

<!-- @segment iti112:2.8 -->

and he has developed the practice that leads to the cessation of the world.

<!-- @segment iti112:3.1 -->

In this world—with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans—whatever is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, and explored by the mind, all that has been understood by the Realized One.

<!-- @segment iti112:3.2 -->

That’s why he’s called the ‘Realized One’.

<!-- @segment iti112:4.1 -->

From the night when the Realized One awakens to the supreme perfect awakening until the night he becomes fully extinguished—in the element of extinguishment with no residue—everything he speaks, says, and expresses is real, not otherwise.

<!-- @segment iti112:4.2 -->

That’s why he’s called the ‘Realized One’.

<!-- @segment iti112:5.1 -->

The Realized One does as he says, and says as he does.

<!-- @segment iti112:5.2 -->

Since this is so,

<!-- @segment iti112:5.3 -->

that’s why he’s called the ‘Realized One’.

<!-- @segment iti112:6.1 -->

In this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—the Realized One is the vanquisher, the unvanquished, the universal seer, the wielder of power.

<!-- @segment iti112:6.2 -->

That’s why he’s called the ‘Realized One’.”

<!-- @segment iti112:6.3 -->

The Buddha spoke this matter.

<!-- @segment iti112:6.4 -->

On this it is said:

<!-- @segment iti112:7.1 -->

“Directly knowing the whole world as it is,

<!-- @segment iti112:7.2 -->

and everything in it,

<!-- @segment iti112:7.3 -->

he is detached from the whole world,

<!-- @segment iti112:7.4 -->

uninvolved with the whole world.

<!-- @segment iti112:8.1 -->

That attentive one is the vanquisher of all

<!-- @segment iti112:8.2 -->

who is released from all ties.

<!-- @segment iti112:8.3 -->

He has reached ultimate peace:

<!-- @segment iti112:8.4 -->

extinguishment, fearing nothing from any quarter.

<!-- @segment iti112:9.1 -->

He is the Buddha, with defilements ended,

<!-- @segment iti112:9.2 -->

untroubled, with doubts cut off.

<!-- @segment iti112:9.3 -->

He has attained the end of all deeds,

<!-- @segment iti112:9.4 -->

freed with the ending of attachments.

<!-- @segment iti112:10.1 -->

That Blessed One is the Buddha,

<!-- @segment iti112:10.2 -->

he is the supreme lion,

<!-- @segment iti112:10.3 -->

in all the world with its gods,

<!-- @segment iti112:10.4 -->

he turns the divine wheel.

<!-- @segment iti112:11.1 -->

And so those gods and humans,

<!-- @segment iti112:11.2 -->

who have gone to the Buddha for refuge,

<!-- @segment iti112:11.3 -->

come together and revere him,

<!-- @segment iti112:11.4 -->

even the deities revere him:

<!-- @segment iti112:12.1 -->

‘Tamed, he is the best of tamers,

<!-- @segment iti112:12.2 -->

peaceful, he is the seer among the peaceful,

<!-- @segment iti112:12.3 -->

liberated, he is the foremost of liberators,

<!-- @segment iti112:12.4 -->

crossed over, he is the most excellent of guides across.’

<!-- @segment iti112:13.1 -->

And so they revere him,

<!-- @segment iti112:13.2 -->

great of heart and intrepid.

<!-- @segment iti112:13.3 -->

In the world with its gods,

<!-- @segment iti112:13.4 -->

he has no rival.”

<!-- @segment iti112:14.1 -->

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I heard.

<!-- @segment iti112:17.5 -->

The So it Was Said is finished.
