---
slug: iti110
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Chapter on the Brahmin’s Offering of the Teaching
---

<!-- @segment iti110:1.1 -->

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

<!-- @segment iti110:2.1 -->

“Mendicants, suppose a mendicant has a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought while walking.

<!-- @segment iti110:2.2 -->

They tolerate it and don’t give it up, get rid of it, eliminate it, and obliterate it. Such a mendicant is said to be ‘not keen or prudent, always lazy, and lacking energy’ when walking.

<!-- @segment iti110:3.1 -->

Suppose a mendicant has a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought while standing …

<!-- @segment iti110:4.1 -->

sitting …

<!-- @segment iti110:5.1 -->

or when lying down while awake.

<!-- @segment iti110:5.2 -->

They tolerate it and don’t give it up, get rid of it, eliminate it, and obliterate it.

<!-- @segment iti110:5.3 -->

Such a mendicant is said to be ‘not keen or prudent, always lazy, and lacking energy’ when lying down while awake.

<!-- @segment iti110:6.1 -->

Suppose a mendicant has a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought while walking.

<!-- @segment iti110:6.2 -->

They don’t tolerate them, but give them up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them.

<!-- @segment iti110:6.3 -->

Such a mendicant is said to be ‘keen and prudent, always energetic and resolute’ when walking.

<!-- @segment iti110:7.1 -->

Suppose a mendicant has a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought while standing …

<!-- @segment iti110:8.1 -->

sitting …

<!-- @segment iti110:9.1 -->

or when lying down while awake.

<!-- @segment iti110:9.2 -->

They don’t tolerate it, but give it up, get rid of it, eliminate it, and obliterate it.

<!-- @segment iti110:9.3 -->

Such a mendicant is said to be ‘keen and prudent, always energetic and resolute’ when lying down while awake.”

<!-- @segment iti110:9.4 -->

The Buddha spoke this matter.

<!-- @segment iti110:9.5 -->

On this it is said:

<!-- @segment iti110:10.1 -->

“Whether walking or standing,

<!-- @segment iti110:10.2 -->

sitting or lying down,

<!-- @segment iti110:10.3 -->

one who thinks a bad thought

<!-- @segment iti110:10.4 -->

to do with the domestic life

<!-- @segment iti110:11.1 -->

is practicing the wrong way,

<!-- @segment iti110:11.2 -->

lost among things that delude;

<!-- @segment iti110:11.3 -->

such a mendicant is incapable

<!-- @segment iti110:11.4 -->

of experiencing the highest awakening.

<!-- @segment iti110:12.1 -->

But one who, whether standing or walking,

<!-- @segment iti110:12.2 -->

sitting or lying down,

<!-- @segment iti110:12.3 -->

has calmed their thoughts,

<!-- @segment iti110:12.4 -->

loving peace of mind;

<!-- @segment iti110:12.5 -->

such a mendicant is capable

<!-- @segment iti110:12.6 -->

of experiencing the highest awakening.”

<!-- @segment iti110:13.1 -->

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I heard.
