---
slug: iti106
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Chapter on the Brahmin’s Offering of the Teaching
---

<!-- @segment iti106:1.1 -->

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

<!-- @segment iti106:2.1 -->

“Mendicants, a family where the children honor their parents in their home is said to live with Divinity.

<!-- @segment iti106:2.2 -->

A family where the children honor their parents in their home is said to live with the elder gods.

<!-- @segment iti106:2.3 -->

A family where the children honor their parents in their home is said to live with the first tutors.

<!-- @segment iti106:2.4 -->

A family where the children honor their parents in their home is said to live with those worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods.

<!-- @segment iti106:3.1 -->

‘Divinity’ is a term for your parents.

<!-- @segment iti106:3.2 -->

‘Elder gods’ is a term for your parents.

<!-- @segment iti106:3.3 -->

‘First tutors’ is a term for your parents.

<!-- @segment iti106:3.4 -->

‘Worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods’ is a term for your parents.

<!-- @segment iti106:3.5 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment iti106:3.6 -->

Parents are very helpful to their children, they raise them, nurture them, and show them the world.”

<!-- @segment iti106:3.7 -->

The Buddha spoke this matter.

<!-- @segment iti106:3.8 -->

On this it is said:

<!-- @segment iti106:4.1 -->

“Parents are said to be ‘Divinity’

<!-- @segment iti106:4.2 -->

and ‘first tutors’.

<!-- @segment iti106:4.3 -->

They’re worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods <j>from their children,

<!-- @segment iti106:4.4 -->

for they love their offspring.

<!-- @segment iti106:5.1 -->

Therefore an astute person

<!-- @segment iti106:5.2 -->

would revere them and honor them

<!-- @segment iti106:5.3 -->

with food and drink,

<!-- @segment iti106:5.4 -->

clothes and bedding,

<!-- @segment iti106:5.5 -->

anointing and bathing,

<!-- @segment iti106:5.6 -->

and by washing their feet.

<!-- @segment iti106:6.1 -->

Because they serve

<!-- @segment iti106:6.2 -->

their parents like this,

<!-- @segment iti106:6.3 -->

they’re praised in this life by the astute,

<!-- @segment iti106:6.4 -->

and they depart to rejoice in heaven.”

<!-- @segment iti106:7.1 -->

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I heard.
