---
slug: iti104
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Chapter on the Brahmin’s Offering of the Teaching
---

<!-- @segment iti104:1.1 -->

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

<!-- @segment iti104:2.1 -->

“Mendicants, take a mendicant who is accomplished in ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom. They advise and instruct. They educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire, and can rightly explain the true teaching. Even the sight of those mendicants is very helpful, I say.

<!-- @segment iti104:2.2 -->

Even to hear them,

<!-- @segment iti104:2.3 -->

approach them,

<!-- @segment iti104:2.4 -->

pay homage to them,

<!-- @segment iti104:2.5 -->

recollect them,

<!-- @segment iti104:2.6 -->

or go forth after them is very helpful, I say.

<!-- @segment iti104:2.7 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment iti104:2.8 -->

For one who frequents and associates with such mendicants, their incomplete spectrum of ethics is completed. Their incomplete spectrum of immersion … wisdom … freedom … knowledge and vision of freedom is completed.

<!-- @segment iti104:2.9 -->

Such mendicants are called ‘teachers’, ‘caravan leaders’, ‘strife-discarders’, ‘dispellers of darkness’, ‘bringers of light’, ‘luminaries’, ‘lamps’, ‘candlebearers’, ‘beacons’, ‘noble ones’, and ‘clear-eyed ones’.”

<!-- @segment iti104:2.10 -->

The Buddha spoke this matter.

<!-- @segment iti104:2.11 -->

On this it is said:

<!-- @segment iti104:3.1 -->

“This is a reason for joy

<!-- @segment iti104:3.2 -->

for those who understand:

<!-- @segment iti104:3.3 -->

that is, those who are evolved,

<!-- @segment iti104:3.4 -->

the noble ones living righteously.

<!-- @segment iti104:4.1 -->

They illuminate the true teaching,

<!-- @segment iti104:4.2 -->

beacons beaming light,

<!-- @segment iti104:4.3 -->

the attentive ones bringing light,

<!-- @segment iti104:4.4 -->

clear-eyed ones with strife discarded.

<!-- @segment iti104:5.1 -->

Having heard their instruction,

<!-- @segment iti104:5.2 -->

the astute, understanding rightly,

<!-- @segment iti104:5.3 -->

directly know the ending of rebirth,

<!-- @segment iti104:5.4 -->

they come not back to future lives.”

<!-- @segment iti104:6.1 -->

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I heard.
