---
slug: iti103
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Chapter on the Brahmin’s Offering of the Teaching
---

<!-- @segment iti103:1.1 -->

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

<!-- @segment iti103:2.1 -->

“Mendicants, there are ascetics and brahmins who don’t truly understand about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.

<!-- @segment iti103:2.2 -->

I don’t deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables don’t realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and don’t live having realized it with their own insight.

<!-- @segment iti103:3.1 -->

There are ascetics and brahmins who truly understand about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.

<!-- @segment iti103:3.2 -->

I regard them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and live having realized it with their own insight.”

<!-- @segment iti103:3.3 -->

The Buddha spoke this matter.

<!-- @segment iti103:3.4 -->

On this it is said:

<!-- @segment iti103:4.1 -->

“There are those who don’t understand suffering

<!-- @segment iti103:4.2 -->

and suffering’s cause,

<!-- @segment iti103:4.3 -->

and where all suffering

<!-- @segment iti103:4.4 -->

cease with no residue left behind.

<!-- @segment iti103:4.5 -->

And they do not know the path

<!-- @segment iti103:4.6 -->

that leads to the stilling of suffering.

<!-- @segment iti103:5.1 -->

They lack the heart’s release,

<!-- @segment iti103:5.2 -->

as well as the release by wisdom.

<!-- @segment iti103:5.3 -->

Unable to make an end,

<!-- @segment iti103:5.4 -->

they continue to be reborn and grow old.

<!-- @segment iti103:6.1 -->

But there are those who understand suffering

<!-- @segment iti103:6.2 -->

and suffering’s cause,

<!-- @segment iti103:6.3 -->

and where all suffering

<!-- @segment iti103:6.4 -->

cease with no residue left behind.

<!-- @segment iti103:6.5 -->

And they understand the path

<!-- @segment iti103:6.6 -->

that leads to the stilling of suffering.

<!-- @segment iti103:7.1 -->

They’re endowed with the heart’s release,

<!-- @segment iti103:7.2 -->

as well as the release by wisdom.

<!-- @segment iti103:7.3 -->

Able to make an end,

<!-- @segment iti103:7.4 -->

they don’t continue to be reborn and grow old.”

<!-- @segment iti103:8.1 -->

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I heard.
