---
slug: iti111
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Chapter on the Brahmin’s Offering of the Teaching
---

<!-- @segment iti111:1.1 -->

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

<!-- @segment iti111:2.1 -->

“Mendicants, live by the ethical precepts and the monastic code. Live restrained in the monastic code, conducting yourselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the rules you’ve undertaken.

<!-- @segment iti111:3.1 -->

When you’ve done this, what more is there to do?

<!-- @segment iti111:4.1 -->

Suppose a mendicant has got rid of desire and ill will while walking, and has given up dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. Their energy is roused up and unflagging, their mindfulness is established and lucid, their body is tranquil and undisturbed, and their mind is immersed in samādhi and unified.

<!-- @segment iti111:4.2 -->

Such a mendicant is said to be ‘keen and prudent, always energetic and resolute’ when walking.

<!-- @segment iti111:5.1 -->

Suppose a mendicant has got rid of desire and ill will while standing …

<!-- @segment iti111:6.1 -->

sitting …

<!-- @segment iti111:7.1 -->

or when lying down while awake.

<!-- @segment iti111:7.2 -->

Such a mendicant is said to be ‘keen and prudent, always energetic and resolute’ when lying down while awake.”

<!-- @segment iti111:7.3 -->

The Buddha spoke this matter.

<!-- @segment iti111:7.4 -->

On this it is said:

<!-- @segment iti111:8.1 -->

“Carefully walking, carefully standing,

<!-- @segment iti111:8.2 -->

carefully sitting, carefully lying;

<!-- @segment iti111:8.3 -->

a mendicant carefully bends their limbs,

<!-- @segment iti111:8.4 -->

and carefully extends them.

<!-- @segment iti111:9.1 -->

Above, below, all round,

<!-- @segment iti111:9.2 -->

as far as the planet extends;

<!-- @segment iti111:9.3 -->

they scrutinize the rise and fall

<!-- @segment iti111:9.4 -->

of phenomena such as the aggregates.

<!-- @segment iti111:10.1 -->

Meditating diligently like this,

<!-- @segment iti111:10.2 -->

peaceful, not restless,

<!-- @segment iti111:10.3 -->

training in what leads to serenity of heart,

<!-- @segment iti111:10.4 -->

always staying mindful;

<!-- @segment iti111:10.5 -->

they call that sort of mendicant

<!-- @segment iti111:10.6 -->

‘always determined’.”

<!-- @segment iti111:11.1 -->

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I heard.
