---
slug: iti109
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Chapter on the Brahmin’s Offering of the Teaching
---

<!-- @segment iti109:1.1 -->

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

<!-- @segment iti109:2.1 -->

“Suppose a person was being carried along by a river current that seemed nice and pleasant.

<!-- @segment iti109:2.2 -->

If a person with clear eyes saw them, they’d say:

<!-- @segment iti109:2.3 -->

‘My man, even though the river current carrying you along seems nice and pleasant, downstream there is a lake with waves and whirlpools, saltwater crocodiles and monsters. When you reach there it will result in death or deadly pain.’

<!-- @segment iti109:2.4 -->

Then, when they heard what was said, they’d paddle against the stream using their hands and feet.

<!-- @segment iti109:3.1 -->

I’ve made up this simile to make a point.

<!-- @segment iti109:3.2 -->

And this is the point.

<!-- @segment iti109:3.3 -->

‘River current’ is a term for craving.

<!-- @segment iti109:4.1 -->

‘Seeming nice and pleasant’ is a term for the six interior sense fields.

<!-- @segment iti109:5.1 -->

‘A downstream lake’ is a term for the five lower fetters.

<!-- @segment iti109:6.1 -->

‘Danger of waves’ is a term for anger and distress.

<!-- @segment iti109:7.1 -->

‘Whirlpool’ is a term for the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

<!-- @segment iti109:8.1 -->

‘Saltwater crocodiles and monsters’ is a term for ladies.

<!-- @segment iti109:9.1 -->

‘Against the stream’ is a term for renunciation.

<!-- @segment iti109:10.1 -->

‘Paddling with hands and feet’ is a term for rousing energy.

<!-- @segment iti109:11.1 -->

‘A person with clear eyes’ is a term for the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha.”

<!-- @segment iti109:11.2 -->

The Buddha spoke this matter.

<!-- @segment iti109:11.3 -->

On this it is said:

<!-- @segment iti109:12.1 -->

“In pain they’d give up sensual pleasures,

<!-- @segment iti109:12.2 -->

aspiring to the future sanctuary from the yoke.

<!-- @segment iti109:12.3 -->

With deep understanding and heart well freed,

<!-- @segment iti109:12.4 -->

they’d experience universal liberation.

<!-- @segment iti109:12.5 -->

That knowledge master <j>who has completed the spiritual journey,

<!-- @segment iti109:12.6 -->

and gone to the end of the world, <j>is called ‘one who has gone beyond’.”

<!-- @segment iti109:13.1 -->

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I heard.
