---
slug: iti107
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Chapter on the Brahmin’s Offering of the Teaching
---

<!-- @segment iti107:1.1 -->

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

<!-- @segment iti107:2.1 -->

“Mendicants, brahmins and householders are very helpful to you, as they provide you with robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.

<!-- @segment iti107:2.2 -->

And you are very helpful to brahmins and householders, as you teach them the Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And you reveal a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure.

<!-- @segment iti107:2.3 -->

That is how this spiritual path is lived supporting each other in order to cross over the flood and make a complete end of suffering.”

<!-- @segment iti107:2.4 -->

The Buddha spoke this matter.

<!-- @segment iti107:2.5 -->

On this it is said:

<!-- @segment iti107:3.1 -->

“The home-dweller and the homeless,

<!-- @segment iti107:3.2 -->

supporting each other,

<!-- @segment iti107:3.3 -->

find success in the true teaching,

<!-- @segment iti107:3.4 -->

the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.

<!-- @segment iti107:4.1 -->

The homeless receive requisites

<!-- @segment iti107:4.2 -->

from the home-dwellers:

<!-- @segment iti107:4.3 -->

robes and lodgings

<!-- @segment iti107:4.4 -->

to shelter from harsh conditions.

<!-- @segment iti107:5.1 -->

Relying on the Holy One,

<!-- @segment iti107:5.2 -->

layfolk and householders of discernment

<!-- @segment iti107:5.3 -->

place faith in the perfected ones,

<!-- @segment iti107:5.4 -->

meditators of noble wisdom.

<!-- @segment iti107:6.1 -->

Having practiced the teaching here,

<!-- @segment iti107:6.2 -->

the path that goes to a good place,

<!-- @segment iti107:6.3 -->

they delight in the heavenly realm,

<!-- @segment iti107:6.4 -->

enjoying all the pleasures they desire.”

<!-- @segment iti107:7.1 -->

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I heard.
