---
slug: sn11.12
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Sakka’s Names
description: The Buddha teaches that in a former life Sakka achieved lordship among the gods by undertaking seven vows—supporting parents, honoring elders, speaking gently, avoiding backbiting, practicing generosity, speaking truth, and quickly abandoning anger.
qualities: anger, stinginess, truth, flexible, giving, tame
theme: inspiration, recollection of the Buddha
---

<!-- @segment sn11.12:1.1 -->

Near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove.

<!-- @segment sn11.12:1.2 -->

There the Buddha said to the mendicants:

<!-- @segment sn11.12:1.3 -->

“Mendicants, in a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he was a student named Magha. That’s why he’s called Maghavā, the Bounteous One.

<!-- @segment sn11.12:2.1 -->

In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he was first to give gifts. That’s why he’s called Purindada, the Firstgiver.

<!-- @segment sn11.12:3.1 -->

In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he gave gifts ably. That’s why he’s called Sakka, the Able.

<!-- @segment sn11.12:4.1 -->

In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he gave the gift of a guest house. That’s why he’s called Vāsava, the Houser.

<!-- @segment sn11.12:5.1 -->

Sakka thinks of a thousand needs in an hour. That’s why he’s called Sahassakkha, the Thousand-Eyed.

<!-- @segment sn11.12:6.1 -->

Sakka’s wife is the titan maiden named Sujā. That’s why he’s called Sujampati, Sujā’s Husband.

<!-- @segment sn11.12:7.1 -->

Sakka rules as sovereign lord over the gods of the thirty-three. That’s why he’s called Devānaminda, the Lord of Gods.

<!-- @segment sn11.12:8.1 -->

In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he undertook seven vows. And it was because of undertaking these that he achieved the status of Sakka.

<!-- @segment sn11.12:8.2 -->

What seven?

<!-- @segment sn11.12:8.3 -->

As long as I live, may I support my parents.

<!-- @segment sn11.12:8.4 -->

As long as I live, may I honor the elders in the family.

<!-- @segment sn11.12:8.5 -->

As long as I live, may I speak gently.

<!-- @segment sn11.12:8.6 -->

As long as I live, may I not backbite.

<!-- @segment sn11.12:8.7 -->

As long as I live, may I live at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share.

<!-- @segment sn11.12:8.8 -->

As long as I live, may I speak the truth.

<!-- @segment sn11.12:8.9 -->

As long as I live, may I be free of anger, or should anger arise, may I quickly get rid of it.

<!-- @segment sn11.12:8.10 -->

In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he undertook seven vows. And it was because of undertaking these that he achieved the status of Sakka.

<!-- @segment sn11.12:9.1 -->

A child who respects their parents,

<!-- @segment sn11.12:9.2 -->

and honors the elders in the family,

<!-- @segment sn11.12:9.3 -->

whose speech is gentle and courteous,

<!-- @segment sn11.12:9.4 -->

and has given up backbiting;

<!-- @segment sn11.12:10.1 -->

who’s committed to getting rid of stinginess,

<!-- @segment sn11.12:10.2 -->

is truthful, and has mastered anger:

<!-- @segment sn11.12:10.3 -->

the gods of the thirty-three declare

<!-- @segment sn11.12:10.4 -->

them to be a true person.”
