---
slug: sn11.4
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Vepacitti
---

<!-- @segment sn11.4:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn11.4:1.2 -->

“Once upon a time, mendicants, a battle was fought between the gods and the titans.

<!-- @segment sn11.4:1.3 -->

Then Vepacitti, lord of titans, addressed the titans,

<!-- @segment sn11.4:1.4 -->

‘My good fellows, if the titans defeat the gods in this battle, bind Sakka, the lord of gods, by his limbs and neck and bring him to my presence in the citadel of the titans.’

<!-- @segment sn11.4:1.5 -->

Meanwhile, Sakka, lord of gods, addressed the gods of the thirty-three,

<!-- @segment sn11.4:1.6 -->

‘My good fellows, if the gods defeat the titans in this battle, bind Vepacitti by his limbs and neck and bring him to my presence in the Hall of Clear Right of the gods.’

<!-- @segment sn11.4:1.7 -->

In that battle the gods won and the titans lost.

<!-- @segment sn11.4:1.8 -->

So the gods of the thirty-three bound Vepacitti by his limbs and neck and brought him to Sakka’s presence in the Hall of Clear Right of the gods.

<!-- @segment sn11.4:1.9 -->

And as Sakka was entering and leaving the hall, Vepacitti abused and insulted him with rude, harsh words.

<!-- @segment sn11.4:1.10 -->

So Mātali the chariot handler addressed Sakka in verse,

<!-- @segment sn11.4:2.1 -->

‘O Maghavā, O Sakka,

<!-- @segment sn11.4:2.2 -->

is it from fear or from weakness

<!-- @segment sn11.4:2.3 -->

that you endure such harsh words

<!-- @segment sn11.4:2.4 -->

in the presence of Vepacitti?’

<!-- @segment sn11.4:3.1 -->

‘It’s not out of fear or weakness

<!-- @segment sn11.4:3.2 -->

that I’m patient with Vepacitti.

<!-- @segment sn11.4:3.3 -->

For how can a sensible person like me

<!-- @segment sn11.4:3.4 -->

get in a fight with a fool?’

<!-- @segment sn11.4:4.1 -->

‘Fools would vent even more

<!-- @segment sn11.4:4.2 -->

if there’s no-one to put a stop to them.

<!-- @segment sn11.4:4.3 -->

So a wise one should stop

<!-- @segment sn11.4:4.4 -->

a fool with forceful punishment.’

<!-- @segment sn11.4:5.1 -->

‘I think that this is the only way

<!-- @segment sn11.4:5.2 -->

to put a stop to a fool,

<!-- @segment sn11.4:5.3 -->

when you know that the other is upset,

<!-- @segment sn11.4:5.4 -->

be mindful and stay calm.’

<!-- @segment sn11.4:6.1 -->

‘In this mere endurance, Vāsava,

<!-- @segment sn11.4:6.2 -->

I see a flaw.

<!-- @segment sn11.4:6.3 -->

When a fool thinks,

<!-- @segment sn11.4:6.4 -->

“He endures me out of fear,”

<!-- @segment sn11.4:6.5 -->

the simpleton will go after you even harder,

<!-- @segment sn11.4:6.6 -->

like a cow chasing someone who runs away.’

<!-- @segment sn11.4:7.1 -->

‘Let him think this if he wishes, or not—

<!-- @segment sn11.4:7.2 -->

“He endures me out of fear.”

<!-- @segment sn11.4:7.3 -->

For the highest goal, one’s own,

<!-- @segment sn11.4:7.4 -->

naught better than patience is found.

<!-- @segment sn11.4:8.1 -->

When a strong person

<!-- @segment sn11.4:8.2 -->

endures a weakling,

<!-- @segment sn11.4:8.3 -->

they call that the ultimate patience,

<!-- @segment sn11.4:8.4 -->

for a weakling must always be patient.

<!-- @segment sn11.4:9.1 -->

The strength of folly

<!-- @segment sn11.4:9.2 -->

is really just weakness, they say.

<!-- @segment sn11.4:9.3 -->

But no-one can challenge a person

<!-- @segment sn11.4:9.4 -->

who’s strong, guarded by the teaching.

<!-- @segment sn11.4:10.1 -->

When you get angry at an angry person

<!-- @segment sn11.4:10.2 -->

you just make things worse for yourself.

<!-- @segment sn11.4:10.3 -->

When you don’t get angry at an angry person

<!-- @segment sn11.4:10.4 -->

you win a battle hard to win.

<!-- @segment sn11.4:11.1 -->

When you know that the other is angry,

<!-- @segment sn11.4:11.2 -->

you act for the good of both

<!-- @segment sn11.4:11.3 -->

yourself and the other

<!-- @segment sn11.4:11.4 -->

if you’re mindful and stay calm.

<!-- @segment sn11.4:12.1 -->

People inexpert in the teaching

<!-- @segment sn11.4:12.2 -->

consider one who heals both

<!-- @segment sn11.4:12.3 -->

oneself and the other

<!-- @segment sn11.4:12.4 -->

to be a fool.’

<!-- @segment sn11.4:13.1 -->

Since, mendicants, even that Sakka, lord of gods—while living off of the fruit of his good deeds, and ruling as sovereign lord over these gods of the thirty-three—will speak in praise of patience and gentleness,

<!-- @segment sn11.4:13.2 -->

you can excel at this, for you who have gone forth in such a well explained teaching and training can develop patience and gentleness.”
