---
slug: sn11.13
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Mahāli
description: The Buddha teaches that in a former life Sakka achieved lordship among the gods by undertaking seven vows—supporting parents, honoring elders, speaking gently, avoiding backbiting, practicing generosity, speaking truth, and quickly abandoning anger.
qualities: anger, stinginess, truth, flexible, giving, tame
theme: inspiration, recollection of the Buddha
---

<!-- @segment sn11.13:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn11.13:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

<!-- @segment sn11.13:1.3 -->

Then Mahāli the Licchavi went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment sn11.13:2.1 -->

“Sir, have you seen Sakka, lord of gods?”

<!-- @segment sn11.13:3.1 -->

“I have, Mahāli.”

<!-- @segment sn11.13:4.1 -->

“But surely, sir, you must have seen someone who looked like Sakka.

<!-- @segment sn11.13:4.2 -->

For Sakka is hard to see.”

<!-- @segment sn11.13:5.1 -->

“Mahāli, I understand Sakka. And I understand the things that he undertook and committed to, which enabled him to achieve the status of Sakka.

<!-- @segment sn11.13:6.1 -->

In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he was a student named Magha. That’s why he’s called Maghavā, the Bounteous.

<!-- @segment sn11.13:7.1 -->

In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he gave gifts ably. That’s why he’s called Sakka, the Able.

<!-- @segment sn11.13:8.1 -->

In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he was first to give gifts. That’s why he’s called Purindada, the Firstgiver.

<!-- @segment sn11.13:9.1 -->

In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he gave the gift of a guest house. That’s why he’s called Vāsava, the Houser.

<!-- @segment sn11.13:10.1 -->

Sakka thinks of a thousand things in an hour. That’s why he’s called Sahassakkha, the Thousand-Eyed.

<!-- @segment sn11.13:11.1 -->

Sakka’s wife is the titan maiden named Sujā. That’s why he’s called Sujampati, Sujā’s Husband.

<!-- @segment sn11.13:12.1 -->

Sakka rules as sovereign lord over the gods of the thirty-three. That’s why he’s called Devānaminda, the Lord of Gods.

<!-- @segment sn11.13:13.1 -->

In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he undertook seven vows. And it was because of undertaking these that he achieved the status of Sakka.

<!-- @segment sn11.13:13.2 -->

What seven?

<!-- @segment sn11.13:13.3 -->

As long as I live, may I support my parents.

<!-- @segment sn11.13:13.4 -->

As long as I live, may I honor the elders in the family.

<!-- @segment sn11.13:13.5 -->

As long as I live, may I speak gently.

<!-- @segment sn11.13:13.6 -->

As long as I live, may I not backbite.

<!-- @segment sn11.13:13.7 -->

As long as I live, may I live at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share.

<!-- @segment sn11.13:13.8 -->

As long as I live, may I speak the truth.

<!-- @segment sn11.13:13.9 -->

As long as I live, may I be free of anger, or should anger arise, may I quickly get rid of it.

<!-- @segment sn11.13:13.10 -->

In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he undertook seven vows. And it was because of undertaking these that he achieved the status of Sakka.

<!-- @segment sn11.13:14.1 -->

A child who respects their parents,

<!-- @segment sn11.13:14.2 -->

and honors the elders in the family,

<!-- @segment sn11.13:14.3 -->

whose speech is gentle and courteous,

<!-- @segment sn11.13:14.4 -->

and has given up backbiting;

<!-- @segment sn11.13:15.1 -->

who’s committed to getting rid of stinginess,

<!-- @segment sn11.13:15.2 -->

is truthful, and has mastered anger:

<!-- @segment sn11.13:15.3 -->

the gods of the thirty-three declare

<!-- @segment sn11.13:15.4 -->

them to be a true person.”
