---
slug: sn11.22
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Ugly
---

<!-- @segment sn11.22:1.1 -->

Near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove.

<!-- @segment sn11.22:1.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn11.22:1.3 -->

“Once upon a time, mendicants, there was a native spirit who was ugly and deformed. He sat on the throne of Sakka, lord of gods.

<!-- @segment sn11.22:1.4 -->

But the gods of the thirty-three complained, grumbled, and objected,

<!-- @segment sn11.22:1.5 -->

‘Oh lord, how incredible, how amazing!

<!-- @segment sn11.22:1.6 -->

This ugly and deformed spirit is sitting on the throne of Sakka, the lord of gods.’

<!-- @segment sn11.22:1.7 -->

But the more the gods complained, the more attractive, good-looking, and lovely that spirit became.

<!-- @segment sn11.22:2.1 -->

So the gods went up to Sakka and told him what had happened. Indra replied,

<!-- @segment sn11.22:2.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn11.22:2.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn11.22:2.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn11.22:2.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn11.22:2.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn11.22:2.7 -->

‘Surely, good fellow, that must be the anger-eating spirit!’

<!-- @segment sn11.22:3.1 -->

Then Sakka went up to that spirit, arranged his robe over one shoulder, knelt with his right knee on the ground, raised his cupped palms toward the anger-eating spirit, and pronounced his name three times:

<!-- @segment sn11.22:3.2 -->

‘Good fellow, I am Sakka, lord of gods! Good fellow, I am Sakka, the lord of gods!’

<!-- @segment sn11.22:3.3 -->

But the more Sakka pronounced his name, the uglier and more deformed the spirit became,

<!-- @segment sn11.22:3.4 -->

until eventually it vanished right there.

<!-- @segment sn11.22:3.5 -->

Then Sakka, lord of gods, guiding the gods of the thirty-three, spoke this verse:

<!-- @segment sn11.22:4.1 -->

‘My mind isn’t easily upset;

<!-- @segment sn11.22:4.2 -->

I’m not easily drawn into the maelstrom.

<!-- @segment sn11.22:4.3 -->

I don’t get angry for long,

<!-- @segment sn11.22:4.4 -->

anger doesn’t last in me.

<!-- @segment sn11.22:5.1 -->

When I do get angry I don’t speak harshly,

<!-- @segment sn11.22:5.2 -->

nor do I advertise my own virtues.

<!-- @segment sn11.22:5.3 -->

I carefully restrain myself

<!-- @segment sn11.22:5.4 -->

out of regard for my own welfare.’”
