---
slug: sn12.26
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Upavāṇa
description: The Buddha teaches on with upavāṇa, presenting an analysis of dependent origination and the causal links that give rise to suffering.
qualities: suffering, wisdom
theme: principle
---

<!-- @segment sn12.26:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn12.26:1.2 -->

Then Venerable Upavāṇa went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

<!-- @segment sn12.26:2.1 -->

“Sir, there are some ascetics and brahmins who declare that suffering is made by oneself.

<!-- @segment sn12.26:2.2 -->

There are some who declare that suffering is made by another.

<!-- @segment sn12.26:2.3 -->

There are some who declare that suffering is made by both oneself and another.

<!-- @segment sn12.26:2.4 -->

There are some who declare that suffering arises anomalously, not made by oneself or another.

<!-- @segment sn12.26:2.5 -->

What does the Buddha say about this? How does he explain it? How should we answer so as to repeat what the Buddha has said, and not misrepresent him with an untruth? How should we explain in line with his teaching, with no legitimate grounds for rebuttal and criticism?”

<!-- @segment sn12.26:3.1 -->

“Upavāṇa, I have said that suffering is dependently originated.

<!-- @segment sn12.26:3.2 -->

Dependent on what?

<!-- @segment sn12.26:3.3 -->

Dependent on contact.

<!-- @segment sn12.26:3.4 -->

In speaking like this, you would repeat what I have said, and not misrepresent me with an untruth. You would explain in line with my teaching, and there would be no legitimate grounds for rebuttal and criticism.

<!-- @segment sn12.26:4.1 -->

In the case of those ascetics and brahmins who declare that suffering is made by oneself, that’s dependent on contact. …

<!-- @segment sn12.26:4.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.26:4.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.26:4.4 -->

In the case of those who declare that suffering arises anomalously, not made by oneself or another, that’s also dependent on contact.

<!-- @segment sn12.26:5.1 -->

In the case of those ascetics and brahmins who declare that suffering is made by oneself, it’s impossible that they will experience that without contact. …

<!-- @segment sn12.26:5.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.26:5.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.26:5.4 -->

In the case of those who declare that suffering arises anomalously, not made by oneself or another, it’s impossible that they will experience that without contact.”
