---
slug: sn12.57
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: A Sapling
description: The Buddha teaches on a sapling, presenting an analysis of dependent origination and the causal links that give rise to suffering.
qualities: craving, suffering, attachment
theme: principle
---

<!-- @segment sn12.57:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn12.57:1.2 -->

“There are things that tighten the fetters. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, your craving grows.

<!-- @segment sn12.57:1.3 -->

Craving is a requirement for grasping. …

<!-- @segment sn12.57:1.4 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

<!-- @segment sn12.57:2.1 -->

Suppose there was a sapling.

<!-- @segment sn12.57:2.2 -->

And from time to time someone would clear around the roots, supply soil, and water it.

<!-- @segment sn12.57:2.3 -->

Fed and fuelled by that, the sapling would grow, increase, and mature.

<!-- @segment sn12.57:2.4 -->

In the same way, there are things that tighten the fetters. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, your craving grows.

<!-- @segment sn12.57:2.5 -->

Craving is a requirement for grasping. …

<!-- @segment sn12.57:2.6 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

<!-- @segment sn12.57:3.1 -->

There are things that tighten the fetters. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, your craving ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.57:3.2 -->

When craving ceases, grasping ceases. …

<!-- @segment sn12.57:3.3 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.57:4.1 -->

Suppose there was a sapling.

<!-- @segment sn12.57:4.2 -->

Then a person comes along with a spade and basket. …

<!-- @segment sn12.57:4.3 -->

They’d cut the sapling apart, cut up the parts, and chop it into splinters. They’d dry the splinters in the wind and sun, burn them with fire, and reduce them to ashes. Then they’d winnow the ashes in a strong wind, or glide them down a swift stream.

<!-- @segment sn12.57:4.4 -->

In this way the sapling is cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future.

<!-- @segment sn12.57:4.5 -->

In the same way, there are things that tighten the fetters. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, your craving ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.57:4.6 -->

When craving ceases, grasping ceases. …

<!-- @segment sn12.57:4.7 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.”
