---
slug: sn12.52
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Grasping
---

<!-- @segment sn12.52:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn12.52:1.2 -->

“There are things that fuel grasping. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, your craving grows.

<!-- @segment sn12.52:1.3 -->

Craving is a requirement for grasping.

<!-- @segment sn12.52:1.4 -->

Grasping is a requirement for continued existence.

<!-- @segment sn12.52:1.5 -->

Continued existence is a requirement for rebirth.

<!-- @segment sn12.52:1.6 -->

Rebirth is a requirement for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be.

<!-- @segment sn12.52:1.7 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

<!-- @segment sn12.52:2.1 -->

Suppose a great mass of fire was burning with ten, twenty, thirty, or forty loads of wood.

<!-- @segment sn12.52:2.2 -->

And from time to time someone would toss in dry grass, cow dung, or wood.

<!-- @segment sn12.52:2.3 -->

Fed and fuelled by that, the great mass of fire would burn for a long time.

<!-- @segment sn12.52:2.4 -->

In the same way, there are things that fuel grasping. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, your craving grows.

<!-- @segment sn12.52:2.5 -->

Craving is a requirement for grasping. …

<!-- @segment sn12.52:2.6 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

<!-- @segment sn12.52:3.1 -->

There are things that fuel grasping. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, your craving ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.52:3.2 -->

When craving ceases, grasping ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.52:3.3 -->

When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.52:3.4 -->

When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.52:3.5 -->

When rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease.

<!-- @segment sn12.52:3.6 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.52:4.1 -->

Suppose a great mass of fire was burning with ten, twenty, thirty, or forty loads of wood.

<!-- @segment sn12.52:4.2 -->

And no-one would toss in dry grass, cow dung, or wood from time to time.

<!-- @segment sn12.52:4.3 -->

As the original fuel is used up and no more is added, the great mass of fire would be extinguished due to not being fed.

<!-- @segment sn12.52:4.4 -->

In the same way, there are things that fuel grasping. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, your craving ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.52:4.5 -->

When craving ceases, grasping ceases. …

<!-- @segment sn12.52:4.6 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.”
