---
slug: sn12.70
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Wanderer Susīma
---

<!-- @segment sn12.70:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:1.3 -->

Now at that time the Buddha was honored, respected, revered, venerated, and esteemed. And he received robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:1.4 -->

And the mendicant Saṅgha was also honored, respected, revered, venerated, and esteemed. And they received robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:1.5 -->

But the wanderers who followed other religions were not honored, respected, revered, venerated, and esteemed. And they didn’t receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:2.1 -->

Now at that time the wanderer Susīma was residing at Rājagaha together with a large community of wanderers.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:2.2 -->

Then his community said to Susīma,

<!-- @segment sn12.70:2.3 -->

“Reverend Susīma, please lead the spiritual life with the ascetic Gotama.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:2.4 -->

Memorize that teaching and have us recite it with you.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:2.5 -->

When we’ve memorized it we’ll recite it to the laity.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:2.6 -->

In this way we too will be honored, respected, revered, venerated, and esteemed. And we’ll receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:2.7 -->

“Yes, reverends,” replied Susīma to his own assembly. Then he went to Venerable Ānanda, and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:2.8 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to Ānanda,

<!-- @segment sn12.70:2.9 -->

“Reverend Ānanda, I wish to lead the spiritual life in this teaching and training.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:3.1 -->

Then Ānanda took Susīma to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment sn12.70:3.2 -->

“Sir, this wanderer Susīma says that

<!-- @segment sn12.70:3.3 -->

he wishes to lead the spiritual life in this teaching and training.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:3.4 -->

“Well then, Ānanda, give Susīma the going forth.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:3.5 -->

And the wanderer Susīma received the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha’s presence.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:4.1 -->

Now at that time several mendicants had declared their enlightenment in the Buddha’s presence:

<!-- @segment sn12.70:4.2 -->

“We understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:4.3 -->

Venerable Susīma heard about this.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:4.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.70:4.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.70:4.6 -->

He went up to those mendicants, and exchanged greetings with them.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:4.7 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to those mendicants,

<!-- @segment sn12.70:4.8 -->

“Is it really true that the venerables have declared enlightenment in the Buddha’s presence?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:4.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.70:4.10 -->

“Yes, reverend.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:5.1 -->

“But knowing and seeing thus, do you wield the many kinds of psychic power? That is, multiplying yourselves and becoming one again; materializing and dematerializing; going unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful. Do you control the body as far as the realm of divinity?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:5.2 -->

“No, reverend.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:6.1 -->

“Well, knowing and seeing thus do you, with clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:6.2 -->

“No, reverend.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:7.1 -->

“Well, knowing and seeing thus, do you understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having encompassed them with your mind?

<!-- @segment sn12.70:7.2 -->

Do you understand mind with greed as ‘mind with greed’,

<!-- @segment sn12.70:7.3 -->

and mind without greed as ‘mind without greed’?

<!-- @segment sn12.70:7.4 -->

Do you understand mind with hate as ‘mind with hate’,

<!-- @segment sn12.70:7.5 -->

and mind without hate as ‘mind without hate’?

<!-- @segment sn12.70:7.6 -->

Do you understand mind with delusion as ‘mind with delusion’,

<!-- @segment sn12.70:7.7 -->

and mind without delusion as ‘mind without delusion’?

<!-- @segment sn12.70:7.8 -->

Do you understand constricted mind as ‘constricted mind’,

<!-- @segment sn12.70:7.9 -->

and scattered mind as ‘scattered mind’?

<!-- @segment sn12.70:7.10 -->

Do you understand expansive mind as ‘expansive mind’,

<!-- @segment sn12.70:7.11 -->

and unexpansive mind as ‘unexpansive mind’?

<!-- @segment sn12.70:7.12 -->

Do you understand mind that is not supreme as ‘mind that is not supreme’,

<!-- @segment sn12.70:7.13 -->

and mind that is supreme as ‘mind that is supreme’?

<!-- @segment sn12.70:7.14 -->

Do you understand mind immersed in samādhi as ‘mind immersed in samādhi’,

<!-- @segment sn12.70:7.15 -->

and mind not immersed in samādhi as ‘mind not immersed in samādhi’?

<!-- @segment sn12.70:7.16 -->

Do you understand freed mind as ‘freed mind’,

<!-- @segment sn12.70:7.17 -->

and unfreed mind as ‘unfreed mind’?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:7.18 -->

“No, reverend.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:8.1 -->

“Well, knowing and seeing thus, do you recollect many kinds of past lives? That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding? Do you remember: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ Do you recollect your many kinds of past lives, with features and details?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:8.2 -->

“No, reverend.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:9.1 -->

“Well, knowing and seeing thus, do you, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place—and understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds? ‘These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, do you see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. And do you understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:9.2 -->

“No, reverend.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:10.1 -->

“Well, knowing and seeing thus, do you have direct meditative experience of the peaceful liberations that are formless, transcending form?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:10.2 -->

“No, reverend.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:11.1 -->

“Well now, venerables, how could there be such a declaration when these things are not attained?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:11.2 -->

“Reverend Susīma, we are freed by wisdom.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:12.1 -->

“I don’t understand the detailed meaning of what you have said in brief.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:12.2 -->

Please teach me this matter so I can understand the detailed meaning.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:12.3 -->

“Reverend Susīma, whether you understand or not, we are freed by wisdom.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:13.1 -->

Then Susīma went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side,

<!-- @segment sn12.70:13.2 -->

and informed the Buddha of all he had discussed with those mendicants.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:13.3 -->

“Susīma, first comes knowledge of the stability of natural principles. Afterwards there is knowledge of extinguishment.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:14.1 -->

“Sir, I don’t understand the detailed meaning of what you have said in brief.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:14.2 -->

Please teach me this matter so I can understand the detailed meaning.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:14.3 -->

“Susīma, whether you understand or not, first comes knowledge of the stability of natural principles. Afterwards there is knowledge of extinguishment.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.1 -->

What do you think, Susīma?

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.2 -->

Is form permanent or impermanent?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.3 -->

“Impermanent, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.4 -->

“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.5 -->

“Suffering, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.6 -->

“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be regarded thus:

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.7 -->

‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.8 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.9 -->

“Is feeling permanent or impermanent?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.10 -->

“Impermanent, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.11 -->

“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.12 -->

“Suffering, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.13 -->

“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be regarded thus:

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.14 -->

‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.15 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.16 -->

“Is perception permanent or impermanent?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.17 -->

“Impermanent, sir.” …

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.18 -->

“Are choices permanent or impermanent?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.19 -->

“Impermanent, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.20 -->

“But if they’re impermanent, are they suffering or happiness?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.21 -->

“Suffering, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.22 -->

“But if they’re impermanent, suffering, and perishable, are they fit to be regarded thus:

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.23 -->

‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.24 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.25 -->

“Is consciousness permanent or impermanent?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.26 -->

“Impermanent, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.27 -->

“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.28 -->

“Suffering, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.29 -->

“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be regarded thus:

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.30 -->

‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:15.31 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:16.1 -->

“So, Susīma, you should truly see any kind of form at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: <em>all</em> form—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

<!-- @segment sn12.70:16.2 -->

You should truly see any kind of feeling at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: <em>all</em> feeling—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

<!-- @segment sn12.70:16.3 -->

You should truly see any kind of perception at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: <em>all</em> perception—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

<!-- @segment sn12.70:16.4 -->

You should truly see any kind of choices at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: <em>all</em> choices—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

<!-- @segment sn12.70:16.5 -->

You should truly see any kind of consciousness at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: <em>all</em> consciousness—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

<!-- @segment sn12.70:17.1 -->

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:17.2 -->

Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:17.3 -->

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’

<!-- @segment sn12.70:18.1 -->

Susīma, do you see that rebirth is a requirement for old age and death?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:18.2 -->

“Yes, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:18.3 -->

“Do you see that continued existence is a requirement for rebirth?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:18.4 -->

“Yes, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:18.5 -->

“Do you see that grasping is a requirement for continued existence?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:18.6 -->

“Yes, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:18.7 -->

“Do you see that craving is a requirement for grasping?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:18.8 -->

“Yes, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:18.9 -->

“Do you see that feeling is a requirement for craving …

<!-- @segment sn12.70:18.10 -->

contact is a requirement for feeling …

<!-- @segment sn12.70:18.11 -->

the six sense fields are requirements for contact …

<!-- @segment sn12.70:18.12 -->

name and form are requirements for the six sense fields …

<!-- @segment sn12.70:18.13 -->

consciousness is a requirement for name and form …

<!-- @segment sn12.70:18.14 -->

choices are a requirement for consciousness …

<!-- @segment sn12.70:18.15 -->

ignorance is a requirement for choices?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:18.16 -->

“Yes, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:19.1 -->

“Do you see that when rebirth ceases old age and death cease?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:19.2 -->

“Yes, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:19.3 -->

“Do you see that when continued existence ceases rebirth ceases?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:19.4 -->

“Yes, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:19.5 -->

“Do you see that when grasping ceases continued existence ceases …

<!-- @segment sn12.70:19.6 -->

when craving ceases, grasping ceases …

<!-- @segment sn12.70:19.7 -->

when feeling ceases, craving ceases …

<!-- @segment sn12.70:19.8 -->

when contact ceases, feeling ceases …

<!-- @segment sn12.70:19.9 -->

when the six sense fields cease, contact ceases …

<!-- @segment sn12.70:19.10 -->

when name and form cease, the six sense fields cease …

<!-- @segment sn12.70:19.11 -->

when consciousness ceases name and form cease …

<!-- @segment sn12.70:19.12 -->

when choices cease consciousness ceases …

<!-- @segment sn12.70:19.13 -->

when ignorance ceases choices cease?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:19.14 -->

“Yes, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:20.1 -->

“But knowing and seeing thus, do you wield the many kinds of psychic power? …”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:20.2 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:21.1 -->

“Well, knowing and seeing thus do you, with clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:21.2 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:22.1 -->

“Well, knowing and seeing thus, do you understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having encompassed them with your mind? …”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:22.4 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:23.1 -->

“Well, knowing and seeing thus, do you recollect many kinds of past lives, with features and details?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:23.2 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:24.1 -->

“Well, knowing and seeing thus, do you, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, see sentient beings passing away and being reborn … according to their deeds?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:24.2 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:25.1 -->

“Well, knowing and seeing thus, do you have direct meditative experience of the peaceful liberations that are formless, transcending form?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:25.2 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:26.1 -->

“Well now, Susīma, how could there be such a declaration when these things are not attained?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:27.1 -->

Then Venerable Susīma bowed with his head at the Buddha’s feet and said,

<!-- @segment sn12.70:27.2 -->

“I made a mistake, sir. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of me to go forth as a thief in such a well-explained teaching and training.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:27.3 -->

Please, sir, accept my mistake for what it is, so I will restrain myself in future.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:28.1 -->

“Indeed, Susīma, you made a mistake. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of you to go forth as a thief of the teachings in such a well-explained teaching and training.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:28.2 -->

Suppose they were to arrest a bandit, a criminal and present him to the king, saying:

<!-- @segment sn12.70:28.3 -->

‘Your Majesty, this is a bandit, a criminal. Punish him as you will.’

<!-- @segment sn12.70:28.4 -->

The king would say:

<!-- @segment sn12.70:28.5 -->

‘Go, my men, and tie this man’s arms tightly behind his back with a strong rope. Shave his head and march him from street to street and from square to square to the beating of a harsh drum. Then take him out the south gate and there, to the south of the city, chop off his head.’

<!-- @segment sn12.70:28.6 -->

The king’s men would do as they were told.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:28.7 -->

What do you think, Susīma?

<!-- @segment sn12.70:28.8 -->

Wouldn’t that man experience pain and distress because of that?”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:28.9 -->

“Yes, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:29.1 -->

“Although that man would experience pain and distress because of that,

<!-- @segment sn12.70:29.2 -->

going forth as a thief of the teachings in such a well-explained teaching and training has a more painful and bitter result. And it even leads to the underworld.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:29.3 -->

But since you have recognized your mistake for what it is, and have dealt with it properly, I accept it.

<!-- @segment sn12.70:29.4 -->

For it is growth in the training of the Noble One to recognize a mistake for what it is, deal with it properly, and commit to restraint in the future.”

<!-- @segment sn12.70:29.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.70:29.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.70:30.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.70:30.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.70:30.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.70:30.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.70:30.5 -->
