---
slug: sn12.55
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: A Great Tree
---

<!-- @segment sn12.55:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn12.55:1.2 -->

“There are things that fuel grasping. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, your craving grows.

<!-- @segment sn12.55:1.3 -->

Craving is a requirement for grasping.

<!-- @segment sn12.55:1.4 -->

Grasping is a requirement for continued existence. …

<!-- @segment sn12.55:1.5 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

<!-- @segment sn12.55:2.1 -->

Suppose there was a great tree.

<!-- @segment sn12.55:2.2 -->

And its roots going downwards and across all draw the sap upwards.

<!-- @segment sn12.55:2.3 -->

Fed and fuelled by that, the great tree would stand for a long time.

<!-- @segment sn12.55:2.4 -->

In the same way, there are things that fuel grasping. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, your craving grows.

<!-- @segment sn12.55:2.5 -->

Craving is a requirement for grasping. …

<!-- @segment sn12.55:2.6 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

<!-- @segment sn12.55:3.1 -->

There are things that fuel grasping. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, your craving ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.55:3.2 -->

When craving ceases, grasping ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.55:3.3 -->

When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. …

<!-- @segment sn12.55:3.4 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.55:4.1 -->

Suppose there was a great tree.

<!-- @segment sn12.55:4.2 -->

Then a person comes along with a spade and basket.

<!-- @segment sn12.55:4.3 -->

They’d cut the tree down at the roots, dig it up, and pull the roots out, down to the fibers and stems.

<!-- @segment sn12.55:4.4 -->

They’d cut the tree apart, cut up the parts, and chop it into splinters. They’d dry the splinters in the wind and sun, burn them with fire, and reduce them to ashes. Then they’d winnow the ashes in a strong wind, or float them away down a swift stream.

<!-- @segment sn12.55:4.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.55:4.6 -->

In this way the great tree is cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future.

<!-- @segment sn12.55:4.7 -->

In the same way, there are things that fuel grasping. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, your craving ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.55:4.8 -->

When craving ceases, grasping ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.55:4.9 -->

When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. …

<!-- @segment sn12.55:4.10 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.”
