---
slug: sn12.51
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: An Inquiry
---

<!-- @segment sn12.51:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:1.3 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,

<!-- @segment sn12.51:1.4 -->

“Mendicants!”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:1.5 -->

“Venerable sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:1.6 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment sn12.51:2.1 -->

“Mendicants, when a mendicant is inquiring, how do you define when they are inquiring for the complete ending of suffering?”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:2.2 -->

“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge. Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The mendicants will listen and remember it.”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:2.3 -->

“Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:2.4 -->

“Yes, sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:2.5 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment sn12.51:3.1 -->

“Mendicants, take a mendicant who makes an inquiry:

<!-- @segment sn12.51:3.2 -->

‘The suffering that arises in the world starting with old age and death takes many and diverse forms.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:3.3 -->

What is the source, origin, birthplace, and inception of this suffering?

<!-- @segment sn12.51:3.4 -->

When what exists do old age and death come to be? When what does not exist do old age and death not come to be?’

<!-- @segment sn12.51:3.5 -->

While making an inquiry they understand:

<!-- @segment sn12.51:3.6 -->

‘The suffering that arises in the world starting with old age and death takes many and diverse forms. The source of this suffering is rebirth.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:3.7 -->

When rebirth exists, old age and death come to be. When rebirth doesn’t exist, old age and death don’t come to be.’

<!-- @segment sn12.51:4.1 -->

They understand old age and death, their origin, their cessation, and the fitting practice for their cessation. And they practice in line with that path.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:4.2 -->

This is called a mendicant who is practicing for the complete ending of suffering, for the cessation of old age and death.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:5.1 -->

Then they inquire further:

<!-- @segment sn12.51:5.2 -->

‘But what is the source of this rebirth? When what exists does rebirth come to be? And when what does not exist does rebirth not come to be?’

<!-- @segment sn12.51:5.3 -->

While making an inquiry they understand:

<!-- @segment sn12.51:5.4 -->

‘Continued existence is the source of rebirth.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:5.5 -->

When continued existence exists, rebirth comes to be. When continued existence does not exist, rebirth doesn’t come to be.’

<!-- @segment sn12.51:6.1 -->

They understand rebirth, its origin, its cessation, and the fitting practice for its cessation. And they practice in line with that path.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:6.2 -->

This is called a mendicant who is practicing for the complete ending of suffering, for the cessation of rebirth.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:7.1 -->

Then they inquire further:

<!-- @segment sn12.51:7.2 -->

‘But what is the source of this continued existence? …’ …

<!-- @segment sn12.51:7.3 -->

‘But what is the source of this grasping? …’ …

<!-- @segment sn12.51:7.4 -->

‘But what is the source of this craving? …’ …

<!-- @segment sn12.51:7.5 -->

‘But what is the source of this feeling? …’ …

<!-- @segment sn12.51:7.6 -->

‘But what is the source of this contact? …’ …

<!-- @segment sn12.51:7.7 -->

‘But what is the source of these six sense fields? …’ …

<!-- @segment sn12.51:7.8 -->

‘But what is the source of this name and form? …’ …

<!-- @segment sn12.51:7.9 -->

‘But what is the source of this consciousness? …’ …

<!-- @segment sn12.51:7.10 -->

‘But what is the source of these choices?

<!-- @segment sn12.51:7.11 -->

When what exists do choices come to be? When what does not exist do choices not come to be?’

<!-- @segment sn12.51:7.12 -->

While making an inquiry they understand:

<!-- @segment sn12.51:7.13 -->

‘Ignorance is the source of choices.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:7.14 -->

When ignorance exists, choices come to be. When ignorance does not exist, choices don’t come to be.’

<!-- @segment sn12.51:8.1 -->

They understand choices, their origin, their cessation, and the fitting practice for their cessation. And they practice in line with that path.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:8.2 -->

This is called a mendicant who is practicing for the complete ending of suffering, for the cessation of choices.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:9.1 -->

If an ignoramus makes a good choice, consciousness passes on by means of goodness.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:9.2 -->

If they make a bad choice, consciousness passes on by means of badness.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:9.3 -->

If they make an imperturbable choice, consciousness passes on by means of imperturbability.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:9.4 -->

When a mendicant has given up ignorance and given rise to knowledge, with the fading away of ignorance and the arising of knowledge they don’t make a good choice, a bad choice, or an imperturbable choice.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:9.5 -->

Not choosing or intending, they don’t grasp at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:9.6 -->

Not grasping, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:9.7 -->

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’

<!-- @segment sn12.51:10.1 -->

If they feel a pleasant feeling, they understand that it’s impermanent, that they’re not attached to it, and that they don’t take pleasure in it.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:10.2 -->

If they feel a painful feeling, they understand that it’s impermanent, that they’re not attached to it, and that they don’t take pleasure in it.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:10.3 -->

If they feel a neutral feeling, they understand that it’s impermanent, that they’re not attached to it, and that they don’t take pleasure in it.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:10.4 -->

If they feel a pleasant feeling, they feel it detached.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:10.5 -->

If they feel a painful feeling, they feel it detached.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:10.6 -->

If they feel a neutral feeling, they feel it detached.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:11.1 -->

Feeling the end of the body draw close, they understand: ‘I feel the end of the body draw close.’ Feeling the end of life draw close, they understand: ‘I feel the end of life draw close.’

<!-- @segment sn12.51:11.2 -->

They understand: ‘When my body breaks up and my life has come to an end, everything that’s felt, since I no longer take pleasure in it, will become cool right here. Only bodily remains will be left.’

<!-- @segment sn12.51:12.1 -->

Suppose a person were to remove a hot clay pot from a potter’s kiln and place it down on level ground.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:12.2 -->

Its heat would dissipate right there, and the shards would be left behind.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:12.3 -->

In the same way, feeling the end of the body draw close, they understand: ‘I feel the end of the body draw close.’ Feeling the end of life draw close, they understand: ‘I feel the end of life draw close.’

<!-- @segment sn12.51:12.4 -->

They understand: ‘When my body breaks up and my life has come to an end, everything that’s felt, since I no longer take pleasure in it, will become cool right here. Only bodily remains will be left.’

<!-- @segment sn12.51:13.1 -->

What do you think, mendicants?

<!-- @segment sn12.51:13.2 -->

Would a mendicant who has ended the defilements still make good choices, bad choices, or imperturbable choices?”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:13.3 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:14.1 -->

“And when there are no choices at all, with the cessation of choices, would consciousness still be found?”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:14.2 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:15.1 -->

“And when there’s no consciousness at all, would name and form still be found?”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:15.2 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:16.1 -->

“And when there are no name and form at all, would the six sense fields still be found?”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:16.2 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:17.1 -->

“And when there are no six sense fields at all, would contact still be found?”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:17.2 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:18.1 -->

“And when there’s no contact at all, would feeling still be found?”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:18.2 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:19.1 -->

“And when there’s no feeling at all, would craving still be found?”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:19.2 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:20.1 -->

“And when there’s no craving at all, would grasping still be found?”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:20.2 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:21.1 -->

“And when there’s no grasping at all, would continued existence still be found?”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:21.2 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:22.1 -->

“And when there’s no continued existence at all, would rebirth still be found?”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:22.2 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:23.1 -->

“And when there’s no rebirth at all, would old age and death still be found?”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:23.2 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.51:24.1 -->

“Good, good, mendicants! That’s how it is, not otherwise.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:24.2 -->

Trust me on this, mendicants; be convinced. Have no doubts or uncertainties in this matter.

<!-- @segment sn12.51:24.3 -->

Just this is the end of suffering.”
