---
slug: sn12.63
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: A Child’s Flesh
description: The Buddha teaches on a child’s flesh, presenting an analysis of dependent origination and the causal links that give rise to suffering.
qualities: desire, respect, suffering, dearness, anxiety, safety
theme: principle
---

<!-- @segment sn12.63:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, these four fuels maintain sentient beings that have been born and help those about to be born.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:1.3 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment sn12.63:1.4 -->

Edible food, whether solid or subtle; contact is the second, mental intention the third, and consciousness the fourth.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:1.5 -->

These are the four fuels that maintain sentient beings that have been born and help those about to be born.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:2.1 -->

And how should you regard edible food?

<!-- @segment sn12.63:2.2 -->

Suppose a couple who were husband and wife set out to cross a desert, taking limited supplies.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:2.3 -->

They had an only child, dear and beloved.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:2.4 -->

As the couple were crossing the desert their limited quantity of supplies would run out,

<!-- @segment sn12.63:2.5 -->

and they’d still have the rest of the desert to cross.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:2.6 -->

Then it would occur to that couple:

<!-- @segment sn12.63:2.7 -->

‘Our limited quantity of supplies has run out,

<!-- @segment sn12.63:2.8 -->

and we still have the rest of the desert to cross.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:2.9 -->

Why don’t we kill our only child, so dear and beloved, and prepare dried and spiced meat? Then we can make it across the desert by eating our child’s flesh. Let not all three perish.’

<!-- @segment sn12.63:2.10 -->

Then that couple would kill their only child, so dear and beloved, and prepare dried and spiced meat. They’d make it across the desert by eating their child’s flesh.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:2.11 -->

And as they’d eat their child’s flesh, they’d beat their breasts and cry:

<!-- @segment sn12.63:2.12 -->

‘Where are you, our only child? Where are you, our only child?’

<!-- @segment sn12.63:3.1 -->

What do you think, mendicants?

<!-- @segment sn12.63:3.2 -->

Would they eat that food for fun, indulgence, adornment, or decoration?”

<!-- @segment sn12.63:3.3 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.63:3.4 -->

“Wouldn’t they eat that food just so they could make it across the desert?”

<!-- @segment sn12.63:3.5 -->

“Yes, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn12.63:3.6 -->

“I say that this is how you should regard edible food.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:3.7 -->

When edible food is completely understood, desire for the five kinds of sensual stimulation is completely understood.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:3.8 -->

When desire for the five kinds of sensual stimulation is completely understood, a noble disciple is bound by no fetter that might return them again to this world.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:4.1 -->

And how should you regard contact as fuel?

<!-- @segment sn12.63:4.2 -->

Suppose there was a flayed cow. If she stands by a wall, the creatures on the wall bite her.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:4.3 -->

If she stands under a tree, the creatures in the tree bite her.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:4.4 -->

If she stands in some water, the creatures in the water bite her.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:4.5 -->

If she stands in the open, the creatures in the open bite her.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:4.6 -->

Wherever that flayed cow stands, the creatures there would bite her.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:4.7 -->

I say that this is how you should regard contact as fuel.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:4.8 -->

When contact as fuel is completely understood, the three feelings are completely understood.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:4.9 -->

When the three feelings are completely understood, a noble disciple has nothing further to do, I say.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:5.1 -->

And how should you regard mental intention as fuel?

<!-- @segment sn12.63:5.2 -->

Suppose there was a pit of glowing coals deeper than a man’s height, filled with glowing coals that neither flamed nor smoked.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:5.3 -->

Then a person would come along who wants to live and doesn’t want to die, who wants to be happy and recoils from pain.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:5.4 -->

Two strong men would grab them by the arms and drag them towards the pit of glowing coals.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:5.5 -->

Then that person’s intention, aim, and wish would be to get far away.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:5.6 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment sn12.63:5.7 -->

Because that person would think:

<!-- @segment sn12.63:5.8 -->

‘If I fall in that pit of glowing coals, that will result in my death or deadly pain.’

<!-- @segment sn12.63:5.9 -->

I say that this is how you should regard mental intention as fuel.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:5.10 -->

When mental intention as fuel is completely understood, the three cravings are completely understood.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:5.11 -->

When the three cravings are completely understood, a noble disciple has nothing further to do, I say.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.1 -->

And how should you regard consciousness as fuel?

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.2 -->

Suppose they were to arrest a bandit, a criminal and present him to the king, saying:

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.3 -->

‘Your Majesty, this is a bandit, a criminal. Punish him as you will.’

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.4 -->

The king would say:

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.5 -->

‘Go, my men, and strike this man in the morning with a hundred spears!’

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.6 -->

The king’s men did as they were told.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.7 -->

Then at midday the king would say:

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.8 -->

‘Look here, how is that man?’

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.9 -->

‘He’s still alive, Your Majesty.’

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.10 -->

The king would say:

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.11 -->

‘Go, my men, and strike this man in the middle of the day with a hundred spears!’

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.12 -->

The king’s men did as they were told.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.13 -->

Then late in the afternoon the king would say:

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.14 -->

‘Look here, how is that man?’

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.15 -->

‘He’s still alive, Your Majesty.’

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.16 -->

The king would say:

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.17 -->

‘Go, my men, and strike this man in the late afternoon with a hundred spears!’

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.18 -->

The king’s men did as they were told.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.19 -->

What do you think, mendicants?

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.20 -->

Would that man experience pain and distress from being struck with three hundred spears a day?”

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.21 -->

“Sir, that man would experience pain and distress from being struck with one spear,

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.22 -->

let alone three hundred spears!”

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.23 -->

“I say that this is how you should regard consciousness as fuel.

<!-- @segment sn12.63:6.24 -->

When consciousness as fuel is completely understood, name and form is completely understood. When name and form are completely understood, a noble disciple has nothing further to do, I say.”
