---
slug: sn12.27
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Dependency
---

<!-- @segment sn12.27:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn12.27:1.2 -->

“Ignorance is a requirement for choices.

<!-- @segment sn12.27:1.3 -->

Choices are a requirement for consciousness. …

<!-- @segment sn12.27:1.4 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

<!-- @segment sn12.27:2.1 -->

And what is old age and death?

<!-- @segment sn12.27:2.2 -->

The old age, decrepitude, broken teeth, grey hair, wrinkly skin, diminished vitality, and failing faculties of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment sn12.27:2.3 -->

This is called old age.

<!-- @segment sn12.27:2.4 -->

The passing away, passing on, disintegration, demise, mortality, death, decease, breaking up of the aggregates, and laying to rest of the corpse of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment sn12.27:2.5 -->

This is called death.

<!-- @segment sn12.27:2.6 -->

Such is old age, and such is death.

<!-- @segment sn12.27:2.7 -->

This is called old age and death.

<!-- @segment sn12.27:2.8 -->

Rebirth is the origin of old age and death.

<!-- @segment sn12.27:2.9 -->

When rebirth ceases, old age and death cease.

<!-- @segment sn12.27:2.10 -->

The practice that leads to the cessation of old age and death is simply this noble eightfold path,

<!-- @segment sn12.27:2.11 -->

that is: right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

<!-- @segment sn12.27:3.1 -->

And what is rebirth? …

<!-- @segment sn12.27:3.2 -->

And what is continued existence? …

<!-- @segment sn12.27:3.3 -->

And what is grasping? …

<!-- @segment sn12.27:3.4 -->

And what is craving? …

<!-- @segment sn12.27:3.5 -->

And what is feeling? …

<!-- @segment sn12.27:3.6 -->

And what is contact? …

<!-- @segment sn12.27:3.7 -->

And what are the six sense fields? …

<!-- @segment sn12.27:3.8 -->

And what are name and form? …

<!-- @segment sn12.27:3.9 -->

And what is consciousness? …

<!-- @segment sn12.27:4.1 -->

And what are choices?

<!-- @segment sn12.27:4.2 -->

There are three kinds of choices.

<!-- @segment sn12.27:4.3 -->

Choices by way of body, speech, and mind.

<!-- @segment sn12.27:4.4 -->

These are called choices.

<!-- @segment sn12.27:4.5 -->

Ignorance is the origin of choices.

<!-- @segment sn12.27:4.6 -->

When ignorance ceases, choices cease.

<!-- @segment sn12.27:4.7 -->

The practice that leads to the cessation of choices is simply this noble eightfold path,

<!-- @segment sn12.27:4.8 -->

that is: right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

<!-- @segment sn12.27:5.1 -->

When a noble disciple thus understands dependency, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation,

<!-- @segment sn12.27:5.2 -->

that noble disciple is called: ‘one accomplished in view’, ‘one accomplished in vision’, ‘one who has come to the true teaching’, ‘one who sees this true teaching’, ‘one endowed with a trainee’s knowledge’, ‘one who has entered the stream of the teaching’, ‘a noble one with penetrative wisdom’, and also ‘one who stands pressing against the door to freedom from death’.”
