---
slug: sn12.42
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Fears and Enmities (2nd)
---

<!-- @segment sn12.42:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn12.42:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, when a noble disciple has quelled five fears and enmities, possesses the four factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and penetrated the noble system with wisdom, they may, if they wish, declare of themselves:

<!-- @segment sn12.42:1.3 -->

‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am assured, destined for awakening.’

<!-- @segment sn12.42:2.1 -->

What are the five fears and enmities they have quelled?

<!-- @segment sn12.42:2.2 -->

Killing living creatures …

<!-- @segment sn12.42:2.3 -->

stealing …

<!-- @segment sn12.42:2.4 -->

sexual misconduct …

<!-- @segment sn12.42:2.5 -->

lying …

<!-- @segment sn12.42:2.6 -->

consuming intoxicants of beer, wine, and liquor …

<!-- @segment sn12.42:2.7 -->

These are the five fears and enmities they have quelled.

<!-- @segment sn12.42:3.1 -->

What are the four factors of stream-entry that they possess?

<!-- @segment sn12.42:3.2 -->

It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha …

<!-- @segment sn12.42:3.3 -->

the teaching …

<!-- @segment sn12.42:3.4 -->

the Saṅgha …

<!-- @segment sn12.42:3.5 -->

and their ethical conduct is loved by the noble ones.

<!-- @segment sn12.42:3.6 -->

These are the four factors of stream-entry that they possess.

<!-- @segment sn12.42:4.1 -->

And what is the noble system that they have clearly seen and penetrated with wisdom?

<!-- @segment sn12.42:4.2 -->

A noble disciple carefully and rationally applies the mind to dependent origination itself …

<!-- @segment sn12.42:4.3 -->

This is the noble system that they have clearly seen and penetrated with wisdom.

<!-- @segment sn12.42:5.1 -->

When a noble disciple has quelled five fears and enmities, possesses the four factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and penetrated the noble system with wisdom, they may, if they wish, declare of themselves:

<!-- @segment sn12.42:5.2 -->

‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am assured, destined for awakening.’”
