---
slug: sn12.2
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Analysis
---

<!-- @segment sn12.2:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, I will teach and analyze for you dependent origination.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:1.3 -->

Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment sn12.2:1.4 -->

“Yes, sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:1.5 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment sn12.2:2.1 -->

“And what is dependent origination?

<!-- @segment sn12.2:2.2 -->

Ignorance is a requirement for choices.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:2.3 -->

Choices are a requirement for consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:2.4 -->

Consciousness is a requirement for name and form.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:2.5 -->

Name and form are requirements for the six sense fields.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:2.6 -->

The six sense fields are requirements for contact.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:2.7 -->

Contact is a requirement for feeling.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:2.8 -->

Feeling is a requirement for craving.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:2.9 -->

Craving is a requirement for grasping.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:2.10 -->

Grasping is a requirement for continued existence.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:2.11 -->

Continued existence is a requirement for rebirth.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:2.12 -->

Rebirth is a requirement for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:2.13 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:3.1 -->

And what is old age and death?

<!-- @segment sn12.2:3.2 -->

The old age, decrepitude, broken teeth, grey hair, wrinkly skin, diminished vitality, and failing faculties of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:3.3 -->

This is called old age.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:3.4 -->

The passing away, passing on, disintegration, demise, mortality, death, decease, breaking up of the aggregates, and laying to rest of the corpse of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:3.5 -->

This is called death.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:3.6 -->

Such is old age, and such is death.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:3.7 -->

This is called old age and death.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:4.1 -->

And what is rebirth?

<!-- @segment sn12.2:4.2 -->

The rebirth, inception, conception, regeneration, manifestation of the aggregates, and acquisition of the sense fields of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:4.3 -->

This is called rebirth.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:5.1 -->

And what is continued existence?

<!-- @segment sn12.2:5.2 -->

There are these three states of existence.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:5.3 -->

Existence in the sensual realm, the realm of luminous form, and the formless realm.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:5.4 -->

This is called continued existence.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:6.1 -->

And what is grasping?

<!-- @segment sn12.2:6.2 -->

There are these four kinds of grasping.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:6.3 -->

Grasping at sensual pleasures, views, precepts and observances, and theories of a self.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:6.4 -->

This is called grasping.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:7.1 -->

And what is craving?

<!-- @segment sn12.2:7.2 -->

There are these six classes of craving.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:7.3 -->

Craving for sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:7.4 -->

This is called craving.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:8.1 -->

And what is feeling?

<!-- @segment sn12.2:8.2 -->

There are these six classes of feeling.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:8.3 -->

Feeling born of contact through the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:8.4 -->

This is called feeling.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:9.1 -->

And what is contact?

<!-- @segment sn12.2:9.2 -->

There are these six classes of contact.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:9.3 -->

Contact through the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:9.4 -->

This is called contact.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:10.1 -->

And what are the six sense fields?

<!-- @segment sn12.2:10.2 -->

The sense fields of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:10.3 -->

These are called the six sense fields.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:11.1 -->

And what are name and form?

<!-- @segment sn12.2:11.2 -->

Feeling, perception, intention, contact, and application of mind.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:11.3 -->

This is called name.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:11.4 -->

The four principal states, and form derived from the four principal states.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:11.5 -->

This is called form.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:11.6 -->

Such is name and such is form.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:11.7 -->

These are called name and form.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:12.1 -->

And what is consciousness?

<!-- @segment sn12.2:12.2 -->

There are these six classes of consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:12.3 -->

Eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:12.4 -->

This is called consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:13.1 -->

And what are choices?

<!-- @segment sn12.2:13.2 -->

There are three kinds of choices.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:13.3 -->

Choices by way of body, speech, and mind.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:13.4 -->

These are called choices.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:14.1 -->

And what is ignorance?

<!-- @segment sn12.2:14.2 -->

Not knowing about suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:14.3 -->

This is called ignorance.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:15.1 -->

And so, ignorance is a requirement for choices.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:15.2 -->

Choices are a requirement for consciousness. …

<!-- @segment sn12.2:15.3 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:15.4 -->

When ignorance fades away and ceases with no residue left behind, choices cease.

<!-- @segment sn12.2:15.5 -->

When choices cease, consciousness ceases. …

<!-- @segment sn12.2:15.6 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.”
