---
slug: sn12.24
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Followers of Other Religions
---

<!-- @segment sn12.24:1.1 -->

Near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:1.2 -->

Then Venerable Sāriputta robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Rājagaha for alms.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:1.3 -->

Then it occurred to him,

<!-- @segment sn12.24:1.4 -->

“It’s too early to wander for alms in Rājagaha.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:1.5 -->

Why don’t I visit the monastery of the wanderers of other religions?”

<!-- @segment sn12.24:2.1 -->

Then he went to the monastery of the wanderers of other religions and exchanged greetings with the wanderers there.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:2.2 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side. The wanderers said to him:

<!-- @segment sn12.24:3.1 -->

“Reverend Sāriputta, there are ascetics and brahmins who teach the efficacy of deeds. Some of them declare that suffering is made by oneself.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:3.2 -->

Some of them declare that suffering is made by another.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:3.3 -->

Some of them declare that suffering is made by both oneself and another.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:3.4 -->

Some of them declare that suffering arises anomalously, not made by oneself or another.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:3.5 -->

What does the ascetic Gotama say about this? How does he explain it?

<!-- @segment sn12.24:3.6 -->

How should we answer so as to repeat what the ascetic Gotama has said, and not misrepresent him with an untruth? How should we explain in line with his teaching, with no legitimate grounds for rebuttal and criticism?”

<!-- @segment sn12.24:4.1 -->

“Reverends, the Buddha has said that suffering is dependently originated.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:4.2 -->

Dependent on what?

<!-- @segment sn12.24:4.3 -->

Dependent on contact.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:4.4 -->

In speaking like this, you would repeat what the Buddha has said, and not misrepresent him with an untruth. You would explain in line with his teaching, and there would be no legitimate grounds for rebuttal and criticism.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:5.1 -->

Consider the ascetics and brahmins who teach the efficacy of deeds. In the case of those who declare that suffering is made by oneself, that’s dependent on contact.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:5.2 -->

In the case of those who declare that suffering is made by another, that’s also dependent on contact.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:5.3 -->

In the case of those who declare that suffering is made by oneself and another, that’s also dependent on contact.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:5.4 -->

In the case of those who declare that suffering arises anomalously, not made by oneself or another, that’s also dependent on contact.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:6.1 -->

Consider the ascetics and brahmins who teach the efficacy of deeds. In the case of those who declare that suffering is made by oneself, it’s impossible that they will experience that without contact.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:6.2 -->

In the case of those who declare that suffering is made by another, it’s impossible that they will experience that without contact.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:6.3 -->

In the case of those who declare that suffering is made by oneself and another, it’s impossible that they will experience that without contact.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:6.4 -->

In the case of those who declare that suffering arises anomalously, not made by oneself or another, it’s impossible that they will experience that without contact.”

<!-- @segment sn12.24:7.1 -->

Venerable Ānanda heard this discussion between Venerable Sāriputta and those wanderers of other religions.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:7.2 -->

Then Ānanda wandered for alms in Rājagaha. After the meal, on his return from almsround, he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side,

<!-- @segment sn12.24:7.3 -->

and informed the Buddha of all they had discussed.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:8.1 -->

“Good, good, Ānanda! It’s just as Sāriputta has so rightly explained.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:8.2 -->

I have said that suffering is dependently originated.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:8.3 -->

Dependent on what?

<!-- @segment sn12.24:8.4 -->

Dependent on contact.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:8.5 -->

Saying this you would repeat what I have said, and not misrepresent me with an untruth. You would explain in line with my teaching, and there would be no legitimate grounds for rebuttal and criticism.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:9.1 -->

Consider the ascetics and brahmins who teach the efficacy of deeds. In the case of those who declare that suffering is made by oneself, that’s dependent on contact. …

<!-- @segment sn12.24:9.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.24:9.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.24:9.4 -->

In the case of those who declare that suffering arises anomalously, not made by oneself or another, that’s also dependent on contact.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:10.1 -->

In the case of those who declare that suffering is made by oneself, it’s impossible that they will experience that without contact. …

<!-- @segment sn12.24:10.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.24:10.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.24:10.4 -->

In the case of those who declare that suffering arises anomalously, not made by oneself or another, it’s impossible that they will experience that without contact.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:11.1 -->

Ānanda, this one time I was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:11.2 -->

Then I robed up in the morning and, taking my bowl and robe, entered Rājagaha for alms.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:11.3 -->

Then I thought:

<!-- @segment sn12.24:11.4 -->

‘It’s too early to wander for alms in Rājagaha.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:11.5 -->

Why don’t I visit the monastery of the wanderers of other religions?’

<!-- @segment sn12.24:12.1 -->

Then I went to the monastery of the wanderers of other religions and exchanged greetings with the wanderers there.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:12.2 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, I sat down to one side. …”

<!-- @segment sn12.24:13.1 -->

(The wanderers asked the Buddha the very same questions, and he gave the same answers.)

<!-- @segment sn12.24:13.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.24:13.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.24:13.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.24:13.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.24:13.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.24:14.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.24:14.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.24:14.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.24:14.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.24:14.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.24:15.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.24:15.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.24:15.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.24:15.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.24:16.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.24:16.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.24:16.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.24:16.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.24:17.1 -->

“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing,

<!-- @segment sn12.24:17.2 -->

how the whole matter is stated with one phrase.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:17.3 -->

Could there be a detailed explanation of this matter that is both deep and appears deep?”

<!-- @segment sn12.24:18.1 -->

“Well then, Ānanda, clarify this matter yourself.”

<!-- @segment sn12.24:18.2 -->

“Sir, suppose they were to ask me:

<!-- @segment sn12.24:18.3 -->

‘Reverend Ānanda, what is the source, origin, birthplace, and inception of old age and death?’

<!-- @segment sn12.24:18.4 -->

I’d answer like this:

<!-- @segment sn12.24:18.5 -->

‘Reverends, rebirth is the source, origin, birthplace, and inception of old age and death.’

<!-- @segment sn12.24:18.6 -->

That’s how I’d answer such a question.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:19.1 -->

Suppose they were to ask me:

<!-- @segment sn12.24:19.2 -->

‘What is the source of rebirth?’

<!-- @segment sn12.24:19.3 -->

I’d answer like this:

<!-- @segment sn12.24:19.4 -->

‘Continued existence is the source of rebirth.’

<!-- @segment sn12.24:19.5 -->

That’s how I’d answer such a question.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:20.1 -->

Suppose they were to ask me:

<!-- @segment sn12.24:20.2 -->

‘What is the source of continued existence?’

<!-- @segment sn12.24:20.3 -->

I’d answer like this:

<!-- @segment sn12.24:20.4 -->

‘Grasping is the source of continued existence.’

<!-- @segment sn12.24:20.5 -->

That’s how I’d answer such a question.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:21.1 -->

Suppose they were to ask me:

<!-- @segment sn12.24:21.2 -->

‘What is the source of grasping?’ …

<!-- @segment sn12.24:21.3 -->

craving …

<!-- @segment sn12.24:21.4 -->

feeling …

<!-- @segment sn12.24:21.5 -->

Suppose they were to ask me:

<!-- @segment sn12.24:21.6 -->

‘What is the source of contact?’

<!-- @segment sn12.24:21.7 -->

I’d answer like this:

<!-- @segment sn12.24:21.8 -->

‘The six sense fields are the source, origin, birthplace, and inception of contact.’

<!-- @segment sn12.24:21.9 -->

‘When the six fields of contact fade away and cease no residue left behind, contact ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:21.10 -->

When contact ceases, feeling ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:21.11 -->

When feeling ceases, craving ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:21.12 -->

When craving ceases, grasping ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:21.13 -->

When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:21.14 -->

When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:21.15 -->

When rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease.

<!-- @segment sn12.24:21.16 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.’

<!-- @segment sn12.24:21.17 -->

That’s how I’d answer such a question.”
