---
slug: sn12.61
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Unlearned
---

<!-- @segment sn12.61:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn12.61:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. …

<!-- @segment sn12.61:1.3 -->

“Mendicants, an unlearned ordinary person might become disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed from this body made up of the four principal states.

<!-- @segment sn12.61:1.4 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment sn12.61:1.5 -->

This body made up of the four principal states is seen to accumulate and disperse, to be taken up and laid to rest.

<!-- @segment sn12.61:1.6 -->

That’s why an unlearned ordinary person might become disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed from it.

<!-- @segment sn12.61:2.1 -->

But an unlearned ordinary person is unable to become disillusioned, dispassionate, or freed from that which is called ‘mind’ and also ‘sentience’ and also ‘consciousness’.

<!-- @segment sn12.61:2.2 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment sn12.61:2.3 -->

Because for a long time they’ve been attached to it, thought of it as their own, and mistaken it:

<!-- @segment sn12.61:2.4 -->

‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self.’

<!-- @segment sn12.61:2.5 -->

That’s why an unlearned ordinary person is unable to become disillusioned, dispassionate, or freed from it.

<!-- @segment sn12.61:3.1 -->

But an unlearned ordinary person would be better off taking this body made up of the four principal states to be their self, rather than the mind.

<!-- @segment sn12.61:3.2 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment sn12.61:3.3 -->

This body made up of the four principal states is seen to last for a year, or for two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, or a hundred years, or even longer.

<!-- @segment sn12.61:4.1 -->

But that which is called ‘mind’ and also ‘sentience’ and also ‘consciousness’ arises as one thing and ceases as another all day and all night.

<!-- @segment sn12.61:4.2 -->

It’s like a monkey moving through the forest. It grabs hold of one branch, lets it go, and grabs another; then it lets that go and grabs yet another.

<!-- @segment sn12.61:4.3 -->

In the same way, that which is called ‘mind’ and also ‘sentience’ and also ‘consciousness’ arises as one thing and ceases as another all day and all night.

<!-- @segment sn12.61:5.1 -->

In this case, a learned noble disciple carefully and rationally applies the mind to dependent origination itself:

<!-- @segment sn12.61:5.2 -->

‘When this exists, this comes to be; due to the arising of this, this arises.

<!-- @segment sn12.61:5.3 -->

When this doesn’t exist, this doesn’t come to be; due to the cessation of this, this ceases. That is:

<!-- @segment sn12.61:5.4 -->

Ignorance is a requirement for choices.

<!-- @segment sn12.61:5.5 -->

Choices are a requirement for consciousness. …

<!-- @segment sn12.61:5.6 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

<!-- @segment sn12.61:5.7 -->

When ignorance fades away and ceases no residue left behind, choices cease.

<!-- @segment sn12.61:5.8 -->

When choices cease, consciousness ceases. …

<!-- @segment sn12.61:5.9 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.’

<!-- @segment sn12.61:6.1 -->

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn12.61:6.2 -->

Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed.

<!-- @segment sn12.61:6.3 -->

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’”
