---
slug: sn12.60
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Causation
description: The Buddha teaches on causation, presenting an analysis of dependent origination and the causal links that give rise to suffering.
qualities: attachment, craving, suffering, lamentation, sorrow, anxiety
theme: principle, story
---

<!-- @segment sn12.60:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Kurus, near the Kuru town named Kammāsadamma.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:1.2 -->

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha:

<!-- @segment sn12.60:1.3 -->

“It’s incredible, sir! It’s amazing,

<!-- @segment sn12.60:1.4 -->

in that this dependent origination is deep and appears deep, yet to me it seems as plain as can be.”

<!-- @segment sn12.60:2.1 -->

“Not so, Ānanda! Not so, Ānanda!

<!-- @segment sn12.60:2.2 -->

This dependent origination is deep and appears deep.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:2.3 -->

It is because of not understanding and not penetrating this teaching that this population has become tangled like string, knotted like a ball of thread, and matted like rushes and reeds, and it doesn’t escape the places of loss, the bad places, the underworld, transmigration.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:3.1 -->

There are things that fuel grasping. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, your craving grows.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:3.2 -->

Craving is a requirement for grasping.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:3.3 -->

Grasping is a requirement for continued existence.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:3.4 -->

Continued existence is a requirement for rebirth.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:3.5 -->

Rebirth is a requirement for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:3.6 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:4.1 -->

Suppose there was a great tree.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:4.2 -->

And its roots going downwards and across all draw the sap upwards.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:4.3 -->

Fed and fuelled by that, the great tree would stand for a long time.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:4.4 -->

In the same way, there are things that fuel grasping. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, your craving grows.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:4.5 -->

Craving is a requirement for grasping.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:4.6 -->

Grasping is a requirement for continued existence. …

<!-- @segment sn12.60:4.7 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:5.1 -->

There are things that fuel grasping. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, your craving ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:5.2 -->

When craving ceases, grasping ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:5.3 -->

When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. …

<!-- @segment sn12.60:5.4 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:6.1 -->

Suppose there was a great tree.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:6.2 -->

Then a person comes along with a spade and basket.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:6.3 -->

They’d cut the tree down at the roots, dig them up, and pull them out, down to the fibers and stems.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:6.4 -->

Then they’d split the tree apart, cut up the parts, and chop it into splinters. They’d dry the splinters in the wind and sun, burn them with fire, and reduce them to ashes. Then they’d winnow the ashes in a strong wind, or float them away down a swift stream.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:6.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.60:6.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.60:6.7 -->

In this way the great tree is cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:6.8 -->

In the same way, there are things that fuel grasping. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, your craving ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:6.9 -->

When craving ceases, grasping ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:6.10 -->

When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:6.11 -->

When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:6.12 -->

When rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease.

<!-- @segment sn12.60:6.13 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.”

<!-- @segment sn12.60:6.14 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.60:6.15 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.60:7.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.60:7.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.60:7.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.60:7.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.60:7.5 -->
