---
slug: sn12.50
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: A Noble Disciple (2nd)
description: The Buddha teaches on a noble disciple (2nd), presenting an analysis of dependent origination and the causal links that give rise to suffering.
qualities: learning, craving, attachment, ending, ignorance, vision
theme: principle, urgency
---

<!-- @segment sn12.50:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn12.50:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, a learned noble disciple doesn’t think:

<!-- @segment sn12.50:1.3 -->

‘When what exists, what is? Due to the arising of what, what arises?

<!-- @segment sn12.50:1.4 -->

When what exists do choices come to be? When what exists does consciousness come to be? When what exists do name and form … the six sense fields … contact … feeling … craving … grasping … continued existence … rebirth … old age and death come to be?’

<!-- @segment sn12.50:2.1 -->

Rather, a learned noble disciple has only knowledge about this that is independent of others:

<!-- @segment sn12.50:2.2 -->

‘When this exists, this comes to be; due to the arising of this, this arises.

<!-- @segment sn12.50:2.3 -->

When ignorance exists, choices come to be.

<!-- @segment sn12.50:2.4 -->

When choices exist consciousness comes to be.

<!-- @segment sn12.50:2.5 -->

When consciousness exists name and form come to be.

<!-- @segment sn12.50:2.6 -->

When name and form exist the six sense fields come to be.

<!-- @segment sn12.50:2.7 -->

When the six sense fields exist contact comes to be.

<!-- @segment sn12.50:2.8 -->

When contact exists feeling comes to be.

<!-- @segment sn12.50:2.9 -->

When feeling exists craving comes to be.

<!-- @segment sn12.50:2.10 -->

When craving exists grasping comes to be.

<!-- @segment sn12.50:2.11 -->

When grasping exists continued existence comes to be.

<!-- @segment sn12.50:2.12 -->

When continued existence exists rebirth comes to be.

<!-- @segment sn12.50:2.13 -->

When rebirth exists old age and death come to be.’

<!-- @segment sn12.50:2.14 -->

They understand:

<!-- @segment sn12.50:2.15 -->

‘That is how this world originates.’

<!-- @segment sn12.50:3.1 -->

A learned noble disciple doesn’t think:

<!-- @segment sn12.50:3.2 -->

‘When what doesn’t exist, what is not? Due to the cessation of what, what ceases?

<!-- @segment sn12.50:3.3 -->

When what doesn’t exist do choices not come to be? When what doesn’t exist does consciousness not come to be? When what doesn’t exist do name and form … the six sense fields … contact … feeling … craving … grasping … continued existence … rebirth … old age and death not come to be?’

<!-- @segment sn12.50:3.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.50:3.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.50:3.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.50:3.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.50:4.1 -->

Rather, a learned noble disciple has only knowledge about this that is independent of others:

<!-- @segment sn12.50:4.2 -->

‘When this doesn’t exist, this doesn’t come to be; due to the cessation of this, this ceases. That is:

<!-- @segment sn12.50:4.3 -->

When ignorance doesn’t exists, choices don’t come to be.

<!-- @segment sn12.50:4.4 -->

When choices don’t exist consciousness doesn’t come to be.

<!-- @segment sn12.50:4.5 -->

When consciousness doesn’t exist name and form don’t come to be.

<!-- @segment sn12.50:4.6 -->

When name and form don’t exist the six sense fields don’t come to be. …

<!-- @segment sn12.50:4.7 -->

When rebirth doesn’t exist old age and death don’t come to be.’

<!-- @segment sn12.50:4.8 -->

They understand:

<!-- @segment sn12.50:4.9 -->

‘That is how this world ceases.’

<!-- @segment sn12.50:5.1 -->

A noble disciple comes to truly understand the origin and ending of the world. Such a noble disciple is one who is called ‘one accomplished in view’, ‘one accomplished in vision’, ‘one who has come to the true teaching’, ‘one who sees this true teaching’, ‘one endowed with a trainee’s knowledge’, ‘one who has entered the stream of the teaching’, ‘a noble one with penetrative wisdom’, and also ‘one who stands pressing against the door to freedom from death’.”

<!-- @segment sn12.50:5.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.50:5.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.50:6.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.50:6.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.50:6.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.50:6.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.50:6.5 -->
