---
slug: sn12.33
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Grounds for Knowledge
---

<!-- @segment sn12.33:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, I will teach forty-four grounds for knowledge.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:1.3 -->

Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment sn12.33:1.4 -->

“Yes, sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:1.5 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment sn12.33:2.1 -->

“And what are the forty-four grounds for knowledge?

<!-- @segment sn12.33:2.2 -->

Knowledge of old age and death, knowledge of the origin of old age and death, knowledge of the cessation of old age and death, and knowledge of the practice that leads to the cessation of old age and death.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:2.3 -->

Knowledge of rebirth …

<!-- @segment sn12.33:2.4 -->

Knowledge of continued existence …

<!-- @segment sn12.33:2.5 -->

Knowledge of grasping …

<!-- @segment sn12.33:2.6 -->

Knowledge of craving …

<!-- @segment sn12.33:2.7 -->

Knowledge of feeling …

<!-- @segment sn12.33:2.8 -->

Knowledge of contact …

<!-- @segment sn12.33:2.9 -->

Knowledge of the six sense fields …

<!-- @segment sn12.33:2.10 -->

Knowledge of name and form …

<!-- @segment sn12.33:2.11 -->

Knowledge of consciousness …

<!-- @segment sn12.33:2.12 -->

Knowledge of choices, knowledge of the origin of choices, knowledge of the cessation of choices, and knowledge of the practice that leads to the cessation of choices.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:2.13 -->

These are called the forty-four grounds for knowledge.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:3.1 -->

And what is old age and death?

<!-- @segment sn12.33:3.2 -->

The old age, decrepitude, broken teeth, grey hair, wrinkly skin, diminished vitality, and failing faculties of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:3.3 -->

This is called old age.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:3.4 -->

The passing away, passing on, disintegration, demise, mortality, death, decease, breaking up of the aggregates, and laying to rest of the corpse of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:3.5 -->

This is called death.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:3.6 -->

Such is old age, and such is death.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:3.7 -->

This is called old age and death.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:4.1 -->

Rebirth is the origin of old age and death.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:4.2 -->

When rebirth ceases, old age and death cease.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:4.3 -->

The practice that leads to the cessation of old age and death is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:

<!-- @segment sn12.33:4.4 -->

right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:5.1 -->

A noble disciple understands old age and death, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation. This is their knowledge of the teaching.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:5.2 -->

With this teaching that is seen, understood, immediately attained, and fathomed, they apply the method to the past and future.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:6.1 -->

Whatever ascetics and brahmins in the past directly knew old age and death, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation, all of them directly knew these things in exactly the same way that I do now.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:7.1 -->

Whatever ascetics and brahmins in the future will directly know old age and death, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation, all of them will directly know these things in exactly the same way that I do now.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:7.2 -->

This is their inferential knowledge.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:8.1 -->

A noble disciple has purified and cleansed these two knowledges—

<!-- @segment sn12.33:8.2 -->

knowledge of the teaching and inferential knowledge.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:8.3 -->

When a noble disciple has done this, they’re one who is called ‘one accomplished in view’, ‘one accomplished in vision’, ‘one who has come to the true teaching’, ‘one who sees this true teaching’, ‘one endowed with a trainee’s knowledge’, ‘one who has entered the stream of the teaching’, ‘a noble one with penetrative wisdom’, and also ‘one who stands pressing against the door to freedom from death’.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:9.1 -->

And what is rebirth? …

<!-- @segment sn12.33:9.2 -->

And what is continued existence? …

<!-- @segment sn12.33:9.3 -->

And what is grasping? …

<!-- @segment sn12.33:9.4 -->

And what is craving? …

<!-- @segment sn12.33:9.5 -->

And what is feeling? …

<!-- @segment sn12.33:9.6 -->

And what is contact? …

<!-- @segment sn12.33:9.7 -->

And what are the six sense fields? …

<!-- @segment sn12.33:9.8 -->

And what are name and form? …

<!-- @segment sn12.33:9.9 -->

And what is consciousness? …

<!-- @segment sn12.33:9.10 -->

And what are choices?

<!-- @segment sn12.33:9.11 -->

There are three kinds of choices.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:9.12 -->

Choices by way of body, speech, and mind.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:9.13 -->

These are called choices.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:10.1 -->

Ignorance is the origin of choices.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:10.2 -->

When ignorance ceases, choices cease.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:10.3 -->

The practice that leads to the cessation of choices is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:

<!-- @segment sn12.33:10.4 -->

right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:11.1 -->

A noble disciple understands choices, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation. This is their knowledge of the teaching.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:11.2 -->

With this teaching that is seen, understood, immediately attained, and fathomed, they apply the method to the past and future.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:12.1 -->

Whatever ascetics and brahmins in the past directly knew choices, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation, all of them directly knew these things in exactly the same way that I do now.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:13.1 -->

Whatever ascetics and brahmins in the future will directly know choices, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation, all of them will directly know these things in exactly the same way that I do now.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:13.2 -->

This is their inferential knowledge.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:14.1 -->

A noble disciple has purified and cleansed these two knowledges—

<!-- @segment sn12.33:14.2 -->

knowledge of the teaching and inferential knowledge.

<!-- @segment sn12.33:14.3 -->

When a noble disciple has done this, they’re one who is called ‘one accomplished in view’, ‘one accomplished in vision’, ‘one who has come to the true teaching’, ‘one who sees this true teaching’, ‘one endowed with a trainee’s knowledge’, ‘one who has entered the stream of the teaching’, ‘a noble one with penetrative wisdom’, and also ‘one who stands pressing against the door to freedom from death’.”
