---
slug: sn12.34
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Grounds for Knowledge (2nd)
description: The Buddha teaches on grounds for knowledge (2nd), presenting an analysis of dependent origination and the causal links that give rise to suffering.
qualities: ignorance, delusion
theme: principle, urgency
---

<!-- @segment sn12.34:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn12.34:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, I will teach seventy-seven grounds for knowledge.

<!-- @segment sn12.34:1.3 -->

Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment sn12.34:1.4 -->

“Yes, sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment sn12.34:1.5 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment sn12.34:2.1 -->

“And what are the seventy-seven grounds for knowledge?

<!-- @segment sn12.34:2.2 -->

The knowledge that rebirth is a requirement for old age and death,

<!-- @segment sn12.34:2.3 -->

and the knowledge that when rebirth doesn’t exist, there is no old age and death.

<!-- @segment sn12.34:2.4 -->

Also regarding the past: the knowledge that rebirth is a requirement for old age and death, and the knowledge that when rebirth doesn’t exist, there is no old age and death.

<!-- @segment sn12.34:2.5 -->

Also regarding the future: the knowledge that rebirth is a requirement for old age and death, and the knowledge that when rebirth doesn’t exist, there is no old age and death.

<!-- @segment sn12.34:2.6 -->

And also their knowledge that even this knowledge of the stability of natural principles is liable to end, vanish, fade away, and cease.

<!-- @segment sn12.34:3.1 -->

The knowledge that continued existence is a requirement for rebirth …

<!-- @segment sn12.34:3.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.34:3.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.34:3.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.34:3.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.34:3.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.34:3.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.34:3.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.34:3.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.34:3.10 -->

The knowledge that ignorance is a requirement for choices, and the knowledge that when ignorance doesn’t exist, there are no choices.

<!-- @segment sn12.34:3.11 -->

Also regarding the past: the knowledge that ignorance is a requirement for choices, and the knowledge that when ignorance doesn’t exist, there are no choices.

<!-- @segment sn12.34:3.12 -->

Also regarding the future: the knowledge that ignorance is a requirement for choices, and the knowledge that when ignorance doesn’t exist, there are no choices.

<!-- @segment sn12.34:3.13 -->

And also their knowledge that even this knowledge of the stability of natural principles is liable to end, vanish, fade away, and cease.

<!-- @segment sn12.34:3.14 -->

These are called the seventy-seven grounds for knowledge.”
