---
slug: sn12.15
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Kaccānagotta
---

<!-- @segment sn12.15:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn12.15:1.2 -->

Then Venerable Kaccānagotta went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

<!-- @segment sn12.15:1.3 -->

“Sir, they speak of this thing called ‘right view’.

<!-- @segment sn12.15:1.4 -->

How is right view defined?”

<!-- @segment sn12.15:2.1 -->

“Kaccāna, this world mostly relies on the duality of existence and non-existence.

<!-- @segment sn12.15:2.2 -->

But for one who truly sees the origin of the world with right understanding, the concept of non-existence regarding the world does not occur.

<!-- @segment sn12.15:2.3 -->

And for one who truly sees the cessation of the world with right understanding, the concept of existence regarding the world does not occur.

<!-- @segment sn12.15:2.4 -->

This world is for the most part shackled by getting involved, grasping, and insisting.

<!-- @segment sn12.15:2.5 -->

But if—for all that getting involved and grasping, mental fixation, and insistence and underlying tendency—they do not get attracted, grasp, and fixate on the thought, ‘my self’,

<!-- @segment sn12.15:2.6 -->

they’ll have no doubt or uncertainty that what arises is just suffering arising, and what ceases is just suffering ceasing. Their knowledge of this is independent of others.

<!-- @segment sn12.15:2.7 -->

This is how right view is defined.

<!-- @segment sn12.15:3.1 -->

‘All exists’: this is one extreme.

<!-- @segment sn12.15:3.2 -->

‘All does not exist’: this is the second extreme.

<!-- @segment sn12.15:3.3 -->

Avoiding these two extremes, the Realized One teaches by the middle way:

<!-- @segment sn12.15:3.4 -->

‘Ignorance is a requirement for choices.

<!-- @segment sn12.15:3.5 -->

Choices are a requirement for consciousness. …

<!-- @segment sn12.15:3.6 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

<!-- @segment sn12.15:3.7 -->

When ignorance fades away and ceases with no residue left behind, choices cease.

<!-- @segment sn12.15:3.8 -->

When choices cease, consciousness ceases. …

<!-- @segment sn12.15:3.9 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.’”
