---
slug: sn12.58
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Name and Form
---

<!-- @segment sn12.58:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn12.58:1.2 -->

“There are things that tighten the fetters. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, name and form are conceived.

<!-- @segment sn12.58:1.3 -->

Name and form are requirements for the six sense fields. …

<!-- @segment sn12.58:1.4 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

<!-- @segment sn12.58:2.1 -->

Suppose there was a great tree.

<!-- @segment sn12.58:2.2 -->

And its roots going downwards and across all draw the sap upwards.

<!-- @segment sn12.58:2.3 -->

Fed and fuelled by that, the great tree would stand for a long time.

<!-- @segment sn12.58:2.4 -->

In the same way, there are things that tighten the fetters. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, name and form are conceived. …

<!-- @segment sn12.58:3.1 -->

There are things that tighten the fetters. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, name and form are not conceived.

<!-- @segment sn12.58:3.2 -->

When name and form cease, the six sense fields cease. …

<!-- @segment sn12.58:3.3 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.58:4.1 -->

Suppose there was a great tree.

<!-- @segment sn12.58:4.2 -->

Then a person comes along with a spade and basket. …

<!-- @segment sn12.58:4.3 -->

In this way the great tree is cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future.

<!-- @segment sn12.58:4.4 -->

In the same way, there are things that tighten the fetters. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, name and form are not conceived.

<!-- @segment sn12.58:4.5 -->

When name and form cease, the six sense fields cease. …

<!-- @segment sn12.58:4.6 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.”
