---
slug: sn12.67
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Sheaves of Reeds
---

<!-- @segment sn12.67:1.1 -->

At one time Venerable Sāriputta and Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita were staying near Varanasi, in the deer park at Isipatana.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:1.2 -->

Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita came out of retreat, went to Venerable Sāriputta, and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:1.3 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to Sāriputta:

<!-- @segment sn12.67:1.4 -->

“Well, Reverend Sāriputta, are old age and death made by oneself? Or by another? Or by both oneself and another? Or do they arise anomalously, not made by oneself or another?”

<!-- @segment sn12.67:1.5 -->

“No, Reverend Koṭṭhita, old age and death are not made by oneself, nor by another, nor by both oneself and another, nor do they arise anomalously, not made by oneself or another.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:1.6 -->

Rather, rebirth is a requirement for old age and death.”

<!-- @segment sn12.67:2.1 -->

“Well, Reverend Sāriputta, is rebirth made by oneself? Or by another? Or by both oneself and another? Or does it arise anomalously, not made by oneself or another?”

<!-- @segment sn12.67:2.2 -->

“No, Reverend Koṭṭhita, rebirth is not made by oneself, nor by another, nor by both oneself and another, nor does it arise anomalously, not made by oneself or another.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:2.3 -->

Rather, continued existence is a requirement for rebirth.”

<!-- @segment sn12.67:3.1 -->

“Well, Reverend Sāriputta, is continued existence made by oneself? …” …

<!-- @segment sn12.67:3.2 -->

“Is grasping made by oneself? …” …

<!-- @segment sn12.67:3.3 -->

“Is craving made by oneself? …” …

<!-- @segment sn12.67:3.4 -->

“Is feeling made by oneself? …” …

<!-- @segment sn12.67:3.5 -->

“Is contact made by oneself? …” …

<!-- @segment sn12.67:3.6 -->

“Are the six sense fields made by oneself? …” …

<!-- @segment sn12.67:3.7 -->

“Well, Reverend Sāriputta, are name and form made by oneself? Or by another? Or by both oneself and another? Or do they arise anomalously, not made by oneself or another?”

<!-- @segment sn12.67:3.8 -->

“No, Reverend Koṭṭhita, name and form are not made by oneself, nor by another, nor by both oneself and another, nor do they arise anomalously, not made by oneself or another.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:3.9 -->

Rather, consciousness is a requirement for name and form.”

<!-- @segment sn12.67:4.1 -->

“Well, Reverend Sāriputta, is consciousness made by oneself? Or by another? Or by both oneself and another? Or does it arise anomalously, not made by oneself or another?”

<!-- @segment sn12.67:4.2 -->

“No, Reverend Koṭṭhita, consciousness is not made by oneself, nor by another, nor by both oneself and another, nor does it arise anomalously, not made by oneself or another.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:4.3 -->

Rather, name and form are requirements for consciousness.”

<!-- @segment sn12.67:5.1 -->

“Just now I understood you to say:

<!-- @segment sn12.67:5.2 -->

‘No, Reverend Koṭṭhita, name and form are not made by oneself, nor by another, nor by both oneself and another, nor do they arise anomalously, not made by oneself or another.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:5.3 -->

Rather, consciousness is a requirement for name and form.’

<!-- @segment sn12.67:6.1 -->

But I also understood you to say:

<!-- @segment sn12.67:6.2 -->

‘No, Reverend Koṭṭhita, consciousness is not made by oneself, nor by another, nor by both oneself and another, nor does it arise anomalously, not made by oneself or another.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:6.3 -->

Rather, name and form are requirements for consciousness.’

<!-- @segment sn12.67:7.1 -->

How then should we see the meaning of this statement?”

<!-- @segment sn12.67:7.2 -->

“Well then, reverend, I shall give you a simile.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:7.3 -->

For by means of a simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:7.4 -->

Suppose there were two sheaves of reeds leaning up against each other.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:7.5 -->

In the same way, name and form are requirements for consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:7.6 -->

Consciousness is a requirement for name and form.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:7.7 -->

Name and form are requirements for the six sense fields.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:7.8 -->

The six sense fields are requirements for contact. …

<!-- @segment sn12.67:7.9 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:7.10 -->

If the first of those sheaves of reeds were to be pulled away, the other would collapse.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:7.11 -->

And if the other were to be pulled away, the first would collapse.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:7.12 -->

In the same way, when name and form cease, consciousness ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:7.13 -->

When consciousness ceases, name and form cease.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:7.14 -->

When name and form cease, the six sense fields cease.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:7.15 -->

When the six sense fields cease, contact ceases. …

<!-- @segment sn12.67:7.16 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.”

<!-- @segment sn12.67:8.1 -->

“It’s incredible, Reverend Sāriputta, it’s amazing!

<!-- @segment sn12.67:8.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.67:8.3 -->

How well spoken this was by Venerable Sāriputta!

<!-- @segment sn12.67:8.4 -->

And we can express our agreement with Venerable Sāriputta’s statement on these thirty-six grounds.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:9.1 -->

If a mendicant teaches Dhamma for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding old age and death, they’re qualified to be called ‘a mendicant who speaks on Dhamma’.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:9.2 -->

If they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding old age and death, they’re qualified to be called ‘a mendicant who practices in line with the teaching’.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:9.3 -->

If they’re freed by not grasping by disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding old age and death, they’re qualified to be called ‘a mendicant who has attained extinguishment in this very life’.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:9.4 -->

If a mendicant teaches Dhamma for disillusionment regarding rebirth …

<!-- @segment sn12.67:9.5 -->

continued existence …

<!-- @segment sn12.67:9.6 -->

grasping …

<!-- @segment sn12.67:9.7 -->

craving …

<!-- @segment sn12.67:9.8 -->

feeling …

<!-- @segment sn12.67:9.9 -->

contact …

<!-- @segment sn12.67:9.10 -->

the six sense fields …

<!-- @segment sn12.67:9.11 -->

name and form …

<!-- @segment sn12.67:9.12 -->

consciousness …

<!-- @segment sn12.67:9.13 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn12.67:9.14 -->

If a mendicant teaches Dhamma for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding ignorance, they’re qualified to be called ‘a mendicant who speaks on Dhamma’.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:9.15 -->

If they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding ignorance, they’re qualified to be called ‘a mendicant who practices in line with the teaching’.

<!-- @segment sn12.67:9.16 -->

If they’re freed by not grasping by disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding ignorance, they’re qualified to be called ‘a mendicant who has attained extinguishment in this very life’.”
