---
slug: sn12.14
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Ascetics and Brahmins (2nd)
description: The Buddha teaches on ascetics and brahmins (2nd), explaining an aspect of dependent origination—its origin, cessation, and the practice leading to its cessation.
qualities: ending, insight, craving, attachment
theme: principle, story
---

<!-- @segment sn12.14:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn12.14:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, there are ascetics and brahmins who don’t understand these things, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation. What things don’t they understand?

<!-- @segment sn12.14:2.1 -->

They don’t understand old age and death, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation.

<!-- @segment sn12.14:2.2 -->

They don’t understand rebirth …

<!-- @segment sn12.14:2.3 -->

continued existence …

<!-- @segment sn12.14:2.4 -->

grasping …

<!-- @segment sn12.14:2.5 -->

craving …

<!-- @segment sn12.14:2.6 -->

feeling …

<!-- @segment sn12.14:2.7 -->

contact …

<!-- @segment sn12.14:2.8 -->

the six sense fields …

<!-- @segment sn12.14:2.9 -->

name and form …

<!-- @segment sn12.14:2.10 -->

consciousness …

<!-- @segment sn12.14:2.11 -->

They don’t understand choices, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation.

<!-- @segment sn12.14:2.12 -->

They don’t understand these things, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation.

<!-- @segment sn12.14:2.13 -->

I don’t deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables don’t realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and don’t live having realized it with their own insight.

<!-- @segment sn12.14:3.1 -->

There are ascetics and brahmins who do understand these things, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation. What things do they understand?

<!-- @segment sn12.14:4.1 -->

They understand old age and death, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation.

<!-- @segment sn12.14:4.2 -->

They understand rebirth …

<!-- @segment sn12.14:4.3 -->

continued existence …

<!-- @segment sn12.14:4.4 -->

grasping …

<!-- @segment sn12.14:4.5 -->

craving …

<!-- @segment sn12.14:4.6 -->

feeling …

<!-- @segment sn12.14:4.7 -->

contact …

<!-- @segment sn12.14:4.8 -->

the six sense fields …

<!-- @segment sn12.14:4.9 -->

name and form …

<!-- @segment sn12.14:4.10 -->

consciousness …

<!-- @segment sn12.14:4.11 -->

They understand choices, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation.

<!-- @segment sn12.14:4.12 -->

They understand these things, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation.

<!-- @segment sn12.14:4.13 -->

I deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and live having realized it with their own insight.”
