---
slug: sn12.17
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Kassapa, the Naked Ascetic
---

<!-- @segment sn12.17:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:1.3 -->

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Rājagaha for alms.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:1.4 -->

The naked ascetic Kassapa saw the Buddha coming off in the distance.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:1.5 -->

He went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:1.6 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he stood to one side and said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment sn12.17:1.7 -->

“I’d like to ask the worthy Gotama about a certain point, if you’d take the time to answer.”

<!-- @segment sn12.17:1.8 -->

“Kassapa, it’s the wrong time for questions.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:1.9 -->

We’ve entered an inhabited area.”

<!-- @segment sn12.17:2.1 -->

A second time,

<!-- @segment sn12.17:2.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.17:2.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.17:2.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.17:2.5 -->

and a third time, Kassapa spoke to the Buddha and the Buddha replied.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:2.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.17:2.7 -->

When this was said, Kassapa said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment sn12.17:2.8 -->

“I don’t want to ask much.”

<!-- @segment sn12.17:2.9 -->

“Ask what you wish, Kassapa.”

<!-- @segment sn12.17:3.1 -->

“Well, worthy Gotama, is suffering made by oneself?”

<!-- @segment sn12.17:3.2 -->

“Not so, Kassapa,” said the Buddha.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:3.3 -->

“Then is suffering made by another?”

<!-- @segment sn12.17:3.4 -->

“Not so, Kassapa,” said the Buddha.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:3.5 -->

“Well, is suffering made by both oneself and another?”

<!-- @segment sn12.17:3.6 -->

“Not so, Kassapa,” said the Buddha.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:3.7 -->

“Then does suffering arise anomalously, not made by oneself or another?”

<!-- @segment sn12.17:3.8 -->

“Not so, Kassapa,” said the Buddha.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:3.9 -->

“Well, is there no such thing as suffering?”

<!-- @segment sn12.17:3.10 -->

“It’s not that there’s no such thing as suffering.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:3.11 -->

Suffering is real.”

<!-- @segment sn12.17:3.12 -->

“Then does the worthy Gotama not know or see suffering?”

<!-- @segment sn12.17:3.13 -->

“It’s not that I don’t know or see suffering.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:3.14 -->

I do know suffering,

<!-- @segment sn12.17:3.15 -->

I do see suffering.”

<!-- @segment sn12.17:4.1 -->

“Worthy Gotama, when asked these questions, you say ‘not so’.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:4.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.17:4.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.17:4.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.17:4.5 -->

Yet you say that there is such a thing as suffering.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:4.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.17:4.7 -->

And you say that you do know suffering,

<!-- @segment sn12.17:4.8 -->

and you do see suffering.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:4.9 -->

Sir, let the Blessed One explain suffering to me!

<!-- @segment sn12.17:4.10 -->

Let the Blessed One teach me about suffering!”

<!-- @segment sn12.17:5.1 -->

“Suppose that he who does the deed and he who experiences the result are one and the same. Then for one who has existed since the beginning, suffering is made by oneself. In speaking like this, one implies this is eternal.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:5.2 -->

Suppose that he who does the deed is one, and he who experiences the result is another. Then for one stricken by feeling, suffering is made by another. In speaking like this, one implies this is annihilated.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:5.3 -->

Avoiding these two extremes, the Realized One teaches by the middle way:

<!-- @segment sn12.17:5.4 -->

‘Ignorance is a requirement for choices.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:5.5 -->

Choices are a requirement for consciousness. …

<!-- @segment sn12.17:5.6 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:5.7 -->

When ignorance fades away and ceases with no residue left behind, choices cease.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:5.8 -->

When choices cease, consciousness ceases. …

<!-- @segment sn12.17:5.9 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.’”

<!-- @segment sn12.17:6.1 -->

When this was said, Kassapa said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment sn12.17:6.2 -->

“Excellent, sir! Excellent!

<!-- @segment sn12.17:6.3 -->

As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, the Buddha has made the teaching clear in many ways.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:6.4 -->

I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:6.5 -->

Sir, may I receive the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha’s presence?”

<!-- @segment sn12.17:7.1 -->

“Kassapa, if someone formerly ordained in another sect wishes to take the going forth, the ordination in this teaching and training, they must spend four months on probation. When four months have passed, if the mendicants are satisfied, they’ll give the going forth, the ordination into monkhood.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:7.2 -->

However, I have recognized individual differences.”

<!-- @segment sn12.17:8.1 -->

“Sir, if four months probation are required in such a case, I’ll spend four years on probation. When four years have passed, if the mendicants are satisfied, let them give me the going forth, the ordination into monkhood.”

<!-- @segment sn12.17:9.1 -->

And the naked ascetic Kassapa received the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha’s presence.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:9.2 -->

Not long after his ordination, Venerable Kassapa, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment sn12.17:9.3 -->

He understood: “Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further for this place.”

<!-- @segment sn12.17:9.4 -->

And Venerable Kassapa became one of the perfected.
