---
slug: sn12.1
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Dependent Origination
---

<!-- @segment sn12.1:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:1.3 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,

<!-- @segment sn12.1:1.4 -->

“Mendicants!”

<!-- @segment sn12.1:1.5 -->

“Venerable sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:1.6 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment sn12.1:1.7 -->

“Mendicants, I will teach you dependent origination.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:1.8 -->

Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment sn12.1:1.9 -->

“Yes, sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:1.10 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment sn12.1:2.1 -->

“And what is dependent origination?

<!-- @segment sn12.1:2.2 -->

Ignorance is a requirement for choices.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:2.3 -->

Choices are a requirement for consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:2.4 -->

Consciousness is a requirement for name and form.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:2.5 -->

Name and form are requirements for the six sense fields.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:2.6 -->

The six sense fields are requirements for contact.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:2.7 -->

Contact is a requirement for feeling.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:2.8 -->

Feeling is a requirement for craving.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:2.9 -->

Craving is a requirement for grasping.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:2.10 -->

Grasping is a requirement for continued existence.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:2.11 -->

Continued existence is a requirement for rebirth.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:2.12 -->

Rebirth is a requirement for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:2.13 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:2.14 -->

This is called dependent origination.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:3.1 -->

When ignorance fades away and ceases no residue left behind, choices cease.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:3.2 -->

When choices cease, consciousness ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:3.3 -->

When consciousness ceases, name and form cease.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:3.4 -->

When name and form cease, the six sense fields cease.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:3.5 -->

When the six sense fields cease, contact ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:3.6 -->

When contact ceases, feeling ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:3.7 -->

When feeling ceases, craving ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:3.8 -->

When craving ceases, grasping ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:3.9 -->

When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:3.10 -->

When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:3.11 -->

When rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:3.12 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.”

<!-- @segment sn12.1:3.13 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment sn12.1:3.14 -->

Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said.
