---
slug: sn12.20
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Conditions
---

<!-- @segment sn12.20:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn12.20:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, I will teach you dependent origination and dependently originated phenomena.

<!-- @segment sn12.20:1.3 -->

Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment sn12.20:1.4 -->

“Yes, sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment sn12.20:1.5 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment sn12.20:2.1 -->

“And what is dependent origination?

<!-- @segment sn12.20:2.2 -->

Rebirth is a requirement for old age and death.

<!-- @segment sn12.20:2.3 -->

Whether Realized Ones arise or not, this law of nature persists, this regularity of natural principles, this surety of natural principles, specific conditionality.

<!-- @segment sn12.20:2.4 -->

A Realized One awakens to this and comprehends it,

<!-- @segment sn12.20:2.5 -->

then he explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals it.

<!-- @segment sn12.20:2.6 -->

‘Look,’ he says,

<!-- @segment sn12.20:2.7 -->

‘Rebirth is a requirement for old age and death.’

<!-- @segment sn12.20:3.1 -->

Continued existence is a requirement for rebirth …

<!-- @segment sn12.20:3.2 -->

Grasping is a requirement for continued existence …

<!-- @segment sn12.20:3.3 -->

Craving is a requirement for grasping …

<!-- @segment sn12.20:3.4 -->

Feeling is a requirement for craving …

<!-- @segment sn12.20:3.5 -->

Contact is a requirement for feeling …

<!-- @segment sn12.20:3.6 -->

The six sense fields are requirements for contact …

<!-- @segment sn12.20:3.7 -->

Name and form are requirements for the six sense fields …

<!-- @segment sn12.20:3.8 -->

Consciousness is a requirement for name and form …

<!-- @segment sn12.20:3.9 -->

Choices are a requirement for consciousness …

<!-- @segment sn12.20:3.10 -->

Ignorance is a requirement for choices.

<!-- @segment sn12.20:3.11 -->

Whether Realized Ones arise or not, this law of nature persists, this regularity of natural principles, this surety of natural principles, specific conditionality.

<!-- @segment sn12.20:3.12 -->

A Realized One awakens to this and comprehends it,

<!-- @segment sn12.20:3.13 -->

then he explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals it.

<!-- @segment sn12.20:3.14 -->

‘Look,’ he says,

<!-- @segment sn12.20:3.15 -->

‘Ignorance is a requirement for choices.’

<!-- @segment sn12.20:3.16 -->

So the fact that this is real, not unreal, not otherwise; the specific conditionality of it:

<!-- @segment sn12.20:3.17 -->

this is called dependent origination.

<!-- @segment sn12.20:4.1 -->

And what are the dependently originated phenomena?

<!-- @segment sn12.20:4.2 -->

Old age and death are impermanent, conditioned, dependently originated, liable to end, vanish, fade away, and cease.

<!-- @segment sn12.20:4.3 -->

Rebirth …

<!-- @segment sn12.20:4.4 -->

Continued existence …

<!-- @segment sn12.20:4.5 -->

Grasping …

<!-- @segment sn12.20:4.6 -->

Craving …

<!-- @segment sn12.20:4.7 -->

Feeling …

<!-- @segment sn12.20:4.8 -->

Contact …

<!-- @segment sn12.20:4.9 -->

The six sense fields …

<!-- @segment sn12.20:4.10 -->

Name and form …

<!-- @segment sn12.20:4.11 -->

Consciousness …

<!-- @segment sn12.20:4.12 -->

Choices …

<!-- @segment sn12.20:4.13 -->

Ignorance is impermanent, conditioned, dependently originated, liable to end, vanish, fade away, and cease.

<!-- @segment sn12.20:4.14 -->

These are called the dependently originated phenomena.

<!-- @segment sn12.20:5.1 -->

When a noble disciple has clearly seen with right wisdom this dependent origination and these dependently originated phenomena as they are, it will be quite impossible for them to turn back to the first beginning, thinking:

<!-- @segment sn12.20:5.2 -->

‘Did I exist in the past? Did I not exist in the past? What was I in the past? How was I in the past? After being what, what did I become in the past?’

<!-- @segment sn12.20:5.3 -->

Or to turn forward to the final end, thinking:

<!-- @segment sn12.20:5.4 -->

‘Will I exist in the future? Will I not exist in the future? What will I be in the future? How will I be in the future? After being what, what will I become in the future?’

<!-- @segment sn12.20:5.5 -->

Or to be undecided about the present, thinking:

<!-- @segment sn12.20:5.6 -->

‘Am I? Am I not? What am I? How am I? This sentient being—where did it come from? And where will it go?’

<!-- @segment sn12.20:5.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.20:5.8 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment sn12.20:5.9 -->

Because that noble disciple has clearly seen with right wisdom this dependent origination and these dependently originated phenomena as they are.”

<!-- @segment sn12.20:5.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.20:5.11 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.20:6.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.20:6.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.20:6.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.20:6.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn12.20:6.5 -->
