---
slug: sn14.13
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: In the Brick Hall
---

<!-- @segment sn14.13:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying at Ñātika in the brick house.

<!-- @segment sn14.13:1.2 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,

<!-- @segment sn14.13:1.3 -->

“Mendicants!”

<!-- @segment sn14.13:1.4 -->

“Venerable sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment sn14.13:1.5 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment sn14.13:2.1 -->

“Mendicants, an element gives rise to a perception, a view, and a thought.”

<!-- @segment sn14.13:2.2 -->

When he said this, Venerable Kaccāna said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment sn14.13:2.3 -->

“Sir, regarding

<!-- @segment sn14.13:2.4 -->

those who are not fully awakened Buddhas, there is a view that they are in fact fully awakened Buddhas. Due to what does this view appear?”

<!-- @segment sn14.13:3.1 -->

“It’s a mighty thing, Kaccāna, the element of ignorance.

<!-- @segment sn14.13:3.2 -->

An inferior element gives rise to inferior perception, inferior view, inferior thought, inferior intention, inferior aim, inferior wish, an inferior person, and inferior speech.

<!-- @segment sn14.13:3.3 -->

One explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals the inferior.

<!-- @segment sn14.13:3.4 -->

I say that their rebirth is inferior.

<!-- @segment sn14.13:4.1 -->

A middling element gives rise to middling perception, middling view, middling thought, middling intention, middling aim, middling wish, a middling person, and middling speech.

<!-- @segment sn14.13:4.2 -->

One explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals the middling.

<!-- @segment sn14.13:4.3 -->

I say that their rebirth is middling.

<!-- @segment sn14.13:5.1 -->

A superior element gives rise to superior perception, superior view, superior thought, superior intention, superior aim, superior wish, a superior person, and superior speech.

<!-- @segment sn14.13:5.2 -->

One explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals the superior.

<!-- @segment sn14.13:5.3 -->

I say that their rebirth is superior.”
