---
slug: sn14.11
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Seven Elements
---

<!-- @segment sn14.11:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn14.11:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, there are these seven elements.

<!-- @segment sn14.11:1.3 -->

What seven?

<!-- @segment sn14.11:1.4 -->

The element of luminosity, the element of beauty, the element of the dimension of infinite space, the element of the dimension of infinite consciousness, the element of the dimension of nothingness, the element of the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, and the element of the cessation of perception and feeling.

<!-- @segment sn14.11:1.5 -->

These are the seven elements.”

<!-- @segment sn14.11:2.1 -->

When he said this, one of the mendicants asked the Buddha,

<!-- @segment sn14.11:2.2 -->

“Sir, due to what does each of these elements appear?”

<!-- @segment sn14.11:3.1 -->

“Mendicant, the element of light appears due to the element of darkness.

<!-- @segment sn14.11:3.2 -->

The element of beauty appears due to the element of ugliness.

<!-- @segment sn14.11:3.3 -->

The element of the dimension of infinite space appears due to the element of form.

<!-- @segment sn14.11:3.4 -->

The element of the dimension of infinite consciousness appears due to the element of the dimension of infinite space.

<!-- @segment sn14.11:3.5 -->

The element of the dimension of nothingness appears due to the element of the dimension of infinite consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn14.11:3.6 -->

The element of the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception appears due to the element of the dimension of nothingness.

<!-- @segment sn14.11:3.7 -->

The element of the cessation of perception and feeling appears due to the element of cessation.”

<!-- @segment sn14.11:4.1 -->

“Sir, how is each of these elements to be attained?”

<!-- @segment sn14.11:5.1 -->

“The elements of light, beauty, the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of infinite consciousness, and the dimension of nothingness are attainments with perception.

<!-- @segment sn14.11:5.2 -->

The element of the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception is an attainment with residual conditioned phenomena.

<!-- @segment sn14.11:5.3 -->

The element of the cessation of perception and feeling is an attainment of cessation.”
