---
slug: sn14.31
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Before Awakening
---

<!-- @segment sn14.31:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn14.31:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, before my awakening—when I was still unawakened but intent on awakening—I thought:

<!-- @segment sn14.31:1.3 -->

‘What’s the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to the earth element …

<!-- @segment sn14.31:1.4 -->

the water element …

<!-- @segment sn14.31:1.5 -->

the fire element …

<!-- @segment sn14.31:1.6 -->

and the air element?’

<!-- @segment sn14.31:2.1 -->

Then it occurred to me:

<!-- @segment sn14.31:2.2 -->

‘The pleasure and happiness that arise from the earth element: this is its gratification.

<!-- @segment sn14.31:2.3 -->

That the earth element is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback.

<!-- @segment sn14.31:2.4 -->

Removing and giving up desire and greed for the earth element: this is its escape.

<!-- @segment sn14.31:2.5 -->

The pleasure and happiness that arise from the water element …

<!-- @segment sn14.31:2.6 -->

The pleasure and happiness that arise from the fire element …

<!-- @segment sn14.31:2.7 -->

The pleasure and happiness that arise from the air element: this is its gratification.

<!-- @segment sn14.31:2.8 -->

That the air element is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback.

<!-- @segment sn14.31:2.9 -->

Removing and giving up desire and greed for the air element: this is its escape.’

<!-- @segment sn14.31:3.1 -->

As long as I didn’t truly understand these four elements’ gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for what they are, I didn’t announce my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

<!-- @segment sn14.31:4.1 -->

But when I did truly understand these four elements’ gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for what they are, I announced my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

<!-- @segment sn14.31:4.2 -->

Knowledge and vision arose in me:

<!-- @segment sn14.31:4.3 -->

‘My freedom is unshakable; this is my last rebirth; now there’ll be no more future lives.’”
