---
slug: sn14.7
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Diversity of Perceptions
---

<!-- @segment sn14.7:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn14.7:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of perceptions. Diversity of perceptions gives rise to diversity of thoughts. Diversity of thoughts gives rise to diversity of desires. Diversity of desires gives rise to diversity of passions. Diversity of passions gives rise to diversity of searches.

<!-- @segment sn14.7:1.3 -->

And what is the diversity of elements?

<!-- @segment sn14.7:1.4 -->

The sight element, the sound element, the smell element, the taste element, the touch element, and the idea element.

<!-- @segment sn14.7:1.5 -->

This is called the diversity of elements.

<!-- @segment sn14.7:2.1 -->

And how does diversity of elements give rise to diversity of perceptions, and diversity of perceptions give rise to diversity of thoughts, and diversity of thoughts give rise to diversity of desires, and diversity of desires give rise to diversity of passions, and diversity of passions give rise to diversity of searches?

<!-- @segment sn14.7:3.1 -->

The sight element gives rise to the perception of sights. The perception of sights gives rise to thoughts about sights. Thoughts about sights give rise to the desire for sights. The desire for sights gives rise to the passion for sights. The passion for sights gives rise to searching for sights. …

<!-- @segment sn14.7:3.2 -->

The idea element gives rise to the perception of ideas. The perception of ideas gives rise to thoughts about ideas. Thoughts about ideas give rise to the desire for ideas. The desire for ideas gives rise to the passion for ideas. The passion for ideas gives rise to searching for ideas.

<!-- @segment sn14.7:4.1 -->

That’s how diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of perceptions, and diversity of perceptions gives rise to diversity of thoughts, and diversity of thoughts gives rise to diversity of desires, and diversity of desires gives rise to diversity of passions, and diversity of passions gives rise to diversity of searches.”
