---
slug: sn15.13
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Thirty Mendicants
description: Thirty mendicants, each claiming to have few defilements remaining, are taught by the Buddha that transmigration has no known beginning and that the mass of suffering they have already undergone is vast beyond measure.
qualities: wholesome, attachment, free from attachment, craving, ignorance, delusion
theme: urgency, wisdom
---

<!-- @segment sn15.13:1.1 -->

Near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove.

<!-- @segment sn15.13:1.2 -->

Then thirty mendicants from Pāvā went to the Buddha. All of them lived in the wilderness, ate only almsfood, wore rag robes, and owned just three robes; yet they all still had fetters. They bowed to the Buddha and sat down to one side.

<!-- @segment sn15.13:1.3 -->

Then it occurred to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment sn15.13:1.4 -->

“These thirty mendicants from Pāvā live in the wilderness, eat only almsfood, wear rag robes, and own just three robes; yet they all still have fetters.

<!-- @segment sn15.13:1.5 -->

Why don’t I teach them the Dhamma in such a way that their minds are freed from defilements by not grasping while sitting in this very seat?”

<!-- @segment sn15.13:1.6 -->

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants,

<!-- @segment sn15.13:1.7 -->

“Mendicants!”

<!-- @segment sn15.13:1.8 -->

“Venerable sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment sn15.13:1.9 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment sn15.13:2.1 -->

“Mendicants, this transmigration has no known beginning.

<!-- @segment sn15.13:2.2 -->

No first point is found of sentient beings roaming and transmigrating, shrouded by ignorance and fettered by craving.

<!-- @segment sn15.13:2.3 -->

What do you think? Which is more: the flow of blood you’ve shed when your head was chopped off while roaming and transmigrating for such a very long time, or the water in the four oceans?”

<!-- @segment sn15.13:2.4 -->

“As we understand the Buddha’s teaching, the flow of blood we’ve shed when our head was chopped off while roaming and transmigrating is more than the water in the four oceans.”

<!-- @segment sn15.13:3.1 -->

“Good, good, mendicants! It’s good that you understand my teaching like this.

<!-- @segment sn15.13:3.2 -->

The flow of blood you’ve shed when your head was chopped off while roaming and transmigrating is indeed more than the water in the four oceans.

<!-- @segment sn15.13:3.3 -->

For a long time you’ve been cows, and the flow of blood you’ve shed when your head was chopped off as a cow is more than the water in the four oceans.

<!-- @segment sn15.13:3.4 -->

For a long time you’ve been buffalo …

<!-- @segment sn15.13:3.5 -->

sheep …

<!-- @segment sn15.13:3.6 -->

goats …

<!-- @segment sn15.13:3.7 -->

deer …

<!-- @segment sn15.13:3.8 -->

chickens …

<!-- @segment sn15.13:3.9 -->

pigs …

<!-- @segment sn15.13:3.10 -->

For a long time you’ve been bandits, arrested for raiding villages,

<!-- @segment sn15.13:3.11 -->

highway robbery,

<!-- @segment sn15.13:3.12 -->

or adultery. And the flow of blood you’ve shed when your head was chopped off as a bandit is more than the water in the four oceans.

<!-- @segment sn15.13:3.13 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment sn15.13:3.14 -->

This transmigration has no known beginning. …

<!-- @segment sn15.13:3.15 -->

This is quite enough for you to become disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding all conditions.”

<!-- @segment sn15.13:4.1 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment sn15.13:4.2 -->

Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment sn15.13:4.3 -->

And while this discourse was being spoken, the minds of the thirty mendicants from Pāvā were freed from defilements by not grasping.
