---
slug: sn15.8
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Ganges
---

<!-- @segment sn15.8:1.1 -->

Near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove.

<!-- @segment sn15.8:1.2 -->

Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment sn15.8:1.3 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and asked the Buddha,

<!-- @segment sn15.8:1.4 -->

“Worthy Gotama, how many eons have passed?”

<!-- @segment sn15.8:1.5 -->

“Brahmin, many eons have passed.

<!-- @segment sn15.8:1.6 -->

It’s not easy to calculate

<!-- @segment sn15.8:1.7 -->

how many eons have passed, how many hundreds or thousands or hundreds of thousands of eons.”

<!-- @segment sn15.8:2.1 -->

“But worthy Gotama, can you give a simile?”

<!-- @segment sn15.8:2.2 -->

“I can,” said the Buddha.

<!-- @segment sn15.8:2.3 -->

“Consider the Ganges river from where it originates to where it meets the ocean. Between these places it’s not easy to calculate

<!-- @segment sn15.8:2.4 -->

how many grains of sand there are, how many hundreds or thousands or hundreds of thousands of grains of sand.

<!-- @segment sn15.8:2.5 -->

The eons that have passed are more than this.

<!-- @segment sn15.8:2.6 -->

It’s not easy to calculate

<!-- @segment sn15.8:2.7 -->

how many eons have passed, how many hundreds or thousands or hundreds of thousands of eons.

<!-- @segment sn15.8:2.8 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment sn15.8:2.9 -->

This transmigration has no known beginning.

<!-- @segment sn15.8:2.10 -->

No first point is found of sentient beings roaming and transmigrating, shrouded by ignorance and fettered by craving.

<!-- @segment sn15.8:2.11 -->

For such a long time you have undergone suffering, agony, and disaster, swelling the cemeteries.

<!-- @segment sn15.8:2.12 -->

This is quite enough for you to become disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding all conditions.”

<!-- @segment sn15.8:3.1 -->

When he said this, the brahmin said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment sn15.8:3.2 -->

“Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! …

<!-- @segment sn15.8:3.3 -->

From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”
