---
slug: sn15.20
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Mount Vepulla
---

<!-- @segment sn15.20:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:1.2 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,

<!-- @segment sn15.20:1.3 -->

“Mendicants!”

<!-- @segment sn15.20:1.4 -->

“Venerable sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:1.5 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment sn15.20:2.1 -->

“Mendicants, this transmigration has no known beginning.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:2.2 -->

No first point is found of sentient beings roaming and transmigrating, shrouded by ignorance and fettered by craving.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:2.3 -->

Once upon a time, mendicants, this Mount Vepulla was known as Pācīnavaṁsa.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:2.4 -->

And at that time people were known as Tivaras.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:2.5 -->

The lifespan of the Tivaras was 40,000 years.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:2.6 -->

It took them four days to climb Mount Vepulla, and four days to descend.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:2.7 -->

At that time Kakusandha, the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha arose in the world.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:2.8 -->

Kakusandha had a fine pair of chief disciples named Vidhura and Sañjīva.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:2.9 -->

See, mendicants! This mountain’s name has vanished, those people have passed away, and that Buddha has become fully quenched.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:2.10 -->

So impermanent are conditions,

<!-- @segment sn15.20:2.11 -->

so unstable are conditions,

<!-- @segment sn15.20:2.12 -->

so unreliable are conditions.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:2.13 -->

This is quite enough for you to become disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding all conditions.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:3.1 -->

Once upon a time this Mount Vepulla was known as Vaṅkaka.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:3.2 -->

And at that time people were known as Rohitassas.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:3.3 -->

The lifespan of the Rohitassas was 30,000 years.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:3.4 -->

It took them three days to climb Mount Vepulla, and three days to descend.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:3.5 -->

At that time Koṇāgamana, the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha arose in the world.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:3.6 -->

Koṇāgamana had a fine pair of chief disciples named Bhiyyosa and Uttara.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:3.7 -->

See, mendicants! This mountain’s name has vanished, those people have passed away, and that Buddha has become fully quenched.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:3.8 -->

So impermanent are conditions …

<!-- @segment sn15.20:3.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn15.20:4.1 -->

Once upon a time this Mount Vepulla was known as Supassa.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:4.2 -->

And at that time people were known as Suppiyas.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:4.3 -->

The lifespan of the Suppiyas was 20,000 years.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:4.4 -->

It took them two days to climb Mount Vepulla, and two days to descend.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:4.5 -->

At that time Kassapa, the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha arose in the world.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:4.6 -->

Kassapa had a fine pair of chief disciples named Tissa and Bhāradvāja.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:4.7 -->

See, mendicants! This mountain’s name has vanished, those people have passed away, and that Buddha has become fully quenched.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:4.8 -->

So impermanent are conditions …

<!-- @segment sn15.20:4.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn15.20:4.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn15.20:5.1 -->

These days this Mount Vepulla is known as Vepulla.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:5.2 -->

And these people are known as Magadhans.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:5.3 -->

The lifespan of the Magadhans is short, brief, and fleeting.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:5.4 -->

A long life is a hundred years or a little more.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:5.5 -->

It takes the Magadhans an hour to climb Mount Vepulla, and an hour to descend.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:5.6 -->

And now I am the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha who has arisen in the world.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:5.7 -->

I have a fine pair of chief disciples named Sāriputta and Moggallāna.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:5.8 -->

There will come a time when this mountain’s name will vanish, those people will die, and I will be fully extinguished.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:5.9 -->

So impermanent are conditions,

<!-- @segment sn15.20:5.10 -->

so unstable are conditions,

<!-- @segment sn15.20:5.11 -->

so unreliable are conditions.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:5.12 -->

This is quite enough for you to become disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding all conditions.”

<!-- @segment sn15.20:6.1 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:6.2 -->

Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

<!-- @segment sn15.20:7.1 -->

“For the Tivaras it was Pācīnavaṁsa,

<!-- @segment sn15.20:7.2 -->

for the Rohitassas, Vaṅkaka,

<!-- @segment sn15.20:7.3 -->

Supassa for the Suppiyas,

<!-- @segment sn15.20:7.4 -->

and Vepulla for the Magadhans.

<!-- @segment sn15.20:8.1 -->

Oh! Conditions are impermanent,

<!-- @segment sn15.20:8.2 -->

their nature is to rise and fall;

<!-- @segment sn15.20:8.3 -->

having arisen, they cease;

<!-- @segment sn15.20:8.4 -->

their settling is such bliss.”

<!-- @segment sn15.20:8.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn15.20:8.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn15.20:9.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn15.20:9.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn15.20:9.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn15.20:9.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn15.20:9.5 -->

The Linked Discourses on the unknown beginning are complete.
