---
slug: sn16.8
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Advice (3rd)
---

<!-- @segment sn16.8:1.1 -->

Near Rājagaha, in the squirrels’ feeding ground.

<!-- @segment sn16.8:1.2 -->

Then Venerable Mahākassapa went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

<!-- @segment sn16.8:1.3 -->

“Kassapa, advise the mendicants!

<!-- @segment sn16.8:1.4 -->

Give them a Dhamma talk!

<!-- @segment sn16.8:1.5 -->

Either you or I should advise the mendicants

<!-- @segment sn16.8:1.6 -->

and give them a Dhamma talk.”

<!-- @segment sn16.8:2.1 -->

“Sir, the mendicants these days are hard to admonish, having qualities that make them hard to admonish. They’re impatient, and don’t take instruction respectfully.”

<!-- @segment sn16.8:2.2 -->

“Kassapa, that’s because formerly the senior mendicants lived in the wilderness, ate only almsfood, wore rag robes, and owned just three robes; and they praised these things. They were of few wishes, content, secluded, aloof, and energetic; and they praised these things.

<!-- @segment sn16.8:3.1 -->

The senior mendicants invite such a mendicant to a seat, saying:

<!-- @segment sn16.8:3.2 -->

‘Welcome, mendicant! What is this mendicant’s name? This mendicant is good-natured; he really wants to train. Please, mendicant, here, take a seat.’

<!-- @segment sn16.8:4.1 -->

Then the junior mendicants think:

<!-- @segment sn16.8:4.2 -->

‘It seems that when a mendicant lives in the wilderness … and is energetic, and praises these things, senior mendicants invite them to a seat …’

<!-- @segment sn16.8:4.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn16.8:4.4 -->

They practice accordingly.

<!-- @segment sn16.8:4.5 -->

That is for their lasting welfare and happiness.

<!-- @segment sn16.8:5.1 -->

But these days, Kassapa, the senior mendicants don’t live in the wilderness … and aren’t energetic; and they don’t praise these things.

<!-- @segment sn16.8:6.1 -->

When a mendicant is well-known and famous, a recipient of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick, senior mendicants invite them to a seat:

<!-- @segment sn16.8:6.2 -->

‘Welcome, mendicant! What is this mendicant’s name? This mendicant is good-natured; he’s fond of his fellow monks. Please, mendicant, here, take a seat.’

<!-- @segment sn16.8:7.1 -->

Then the junior mendicants think:

<!-- @segment sn16.8:7.2 -->

‘It seems that when a mendicant is well-known and famous, a recipient of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick, senior mendicants invite them to a seat …’

<!-- @segment sn16.8:7.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn16.8:7.4 -->

They practice accordingly.

<!-- @segment sn16.8:7.5 -->

That is for their lasting harm and suffering.

<!-- @segment sn16.8:7.6 -->

And if it could ever be rightly said that

<!-- @segment sn16.8:7.7 -->

spiritual practitioners have been imperiled by the peril of a spiritual practitioner, and vanquished by the vanquishing of a spiritual practitioner, it is these days that this could be rightly said.”
