---
slug: sn16.10
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Nuns’ Quarters
description: "The Buddha declares that whenever he enters the absorptions, wields psychic powers, recollects past lives, sees beings' rebirths, and realizes freedom from defilements, Venerable Mahākassapa can do the same."
qualities: liberation, ending, insight, wisdom, attachment, jhana
theme: training guideline, inspiration
---

<!-- @segment sn16.10:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn16.10:1.2 -->

At one time Venerable Mahākassapa was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment sn16.10:1.3 -->

Then Venerable Ānanda robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to Mahākassapa and said,

<!-- @segment sn16.10:1.4 -->

“Kassapa, come, sir. Let’s go to one of the nuns’ quarters.”

<!-- @segment sn16.10:1.5 -->

“You go, Reverend Ānanda. You’re the one with many duties and responsibilities.”

<!-- @segment sn16.10:1.6 -->

And a second time …

<!-- @segment sn16.10:1.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn16.10:1.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn16.10:1.9 -->

And a third time, Ānanda said,

<!-- @segment sn16.10:1.10 -->

“Come, Honorable Kassapa. Let’s go to one of the nuns’ quarters.”

<!-- @segment sn16.10:2.1 -->

Then Venerable Mahākassapa robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went with Venerable Ānanda as his second monk to one of the nuns’ quarters, where he sat on the seat spread out.

<!-- @segment sn16.10:2.2 -->

And then several nuns went up to Mahākassapa, bowed, and sat down to one side.

<!-- @segment sn16.10:2.3 -->

Mahākassapa educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired those nuns with a Dhamma talk,

<!-- @segment sn16.10:2.4 -->

after which he rose from his seat and left.

<!-- @segment sn16.10:3.1 -->

But the nun Thullatissā was upset and blurted out,

<!-- @segment sn16.10:3.2 -->

“What is the venerable Mahākassapa thinking, that he’d teach Dhamma in front of the venerable Ānanda, the Videhan sage?

<!-- @segment sn16.10:3.3 -->

He’s like a needle peddler who thinks they can sell a needle to a needle maker!”

<!-- @segment sn16.10:3.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn16.10:4.1 -->

Mahākassapa heard Thullatissā say these words,

<!-- @segment sn16.10:4.2 -->

and he said to Ānanda,

<!-- @segment sn16.10:4.3 -->

“Is that right, Reverend Ānanda? Am I the needle peddler and you the needle maker?

<!-- @segment sn16.10:4.4 -->

Or am I the needle maker and you the needle peddler?”

<!-- @segment sn16.10:4.5 -->

“Forgive her, sir. The lady’s a fool.”

<!-- @segment sn16.10:4.6 -->

“Hold on, Reverend Ānanda! Don’t make the Saṅgha investigate you further!

<!-- @segment sn16.10:5.1 -->

What do you think, Reverend Ānanda?

<!-- @segment sn16.10:5.2 -->

Was it you who the Buddha brought up before the Saṅgha of mendicants, saying:

<!-- @segment sn16.10:5.3 -->

‘Mendicants, whenever I want, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, I enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment sn16.10:5.4 -->

And so does Ānanda’?”

<!-- @segment sn16.10:5.5 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn16.10:6.1 -->

“I was the one the Buddha brought up before the Saṅgha of mendicants, saying:

<!-- @segment sn16.10:6.2 -->

‘Mendicants, whenever I want, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, I enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment sn16.10:6.3 -->

And so does Kassapa. …’

<!-- @segment sn16.10:6.4 -->

(The nine progressive meditations and the five insights should be told in full.)

<!-- @segment sn16.10:7.1 -->

What do you think, Reverend Ānanda?

<!-- @segment sn16.10:7.2 -->

Was it you who the Buddha brought up before the Saṅgha of mendicants, saying:

<!-- @segment sn16.10:7.3 -->

‘I have realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And I live having realized it with my own insight due to the ending of defilements.

<!-- @segment sn16.10:7.4 -->

And so does Ānanda’?”

<!-- @segment sn16.10:7.5 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn16.10:8.1 -->

“I was the one the Buddha brought up before the Saṅgha of mendicants, saying:

<!-- @segment sn16.10:8.2 -->

‘I have realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And I live having realized it with my own insight due to the ending of defilements.

<!-- @segment sn16.10:8.3 -->

And so does Kassapa.’

<!-- @segment sn16.10:9.1 -->

Reverend, you might as well think to hide a bull elephant that’s three or three and a half meters tall behind a palm leaf as to hide my six insights.”

<!-- @segment sn16.10:10.1 -->

But the nun Thullatissā fell from the spiritual life.
