---
slug: sn16.2
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Imprudent
description: The Buddha teaches on Venerable Mahākassapa regarding imprudent, holding him up as a model of austere conduct, wisdom, and dedication to the training.
qualities: harm, unwholesome, wholesome, safety
theme: story, principle
---

<!-- @segment sn16.2:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn16.2:1.2 -->

At one time Venerable Mahākassapa and Venerable Sāriputta were staying near Varanasi, in the deer park at Isipatana.

<!-- @segment sn16.2:1.3 -->

Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Sāriputta came out of retreat, went to Venerable Mahākassapa, and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment sn16.2:1.4 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to Mahākassapa:

<!-- @segment sn16.2:1.5 -->

“Reverend Kassapa, it’s said that without being keen and prudent you can’t achieve awakening, extinguishment, and the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.

<!-- @segment sn16.2:1.6 -->

But if you are keen and prudent you can achieve awakening, extinguishment, and the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.

<!-- @segment sn16.2:2.1 -->

To what extent is this the case?”

<!-- @segment sn16.2:2.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn16.2:2.3 -->

“Reverend, take a mendicant who doesn’t foster keenness by thinking: ‘If unarisen unskillful qualities arise in me, they’ll lead to harm.’ ‘If I don’t give up arisen unskillful qualities, they’ll lead to harm.’ ‘If I don’t give rise to unarisen skillful qualities, they’ll lead to harm.’ ‘If arisen skillful qualities cease in me, they’ll lead to harm.’

<!-- @segment sn16.2:2.4 -->

That’s how you’re not keen.

<!-- @segment sn16.2:3.1 -->

And how are you not prudent?

<!-- @segment sn16.2:3.2 -->

Take a mendicant who doesn’t foster prudence by thinking: ‘If unarisen unskillful qualities arise in me, they’ll lead to harm.’ ‘If I don’t give up arisen unskillful qualities, they’ll lead to harm.’ ‘If I don’t give rise to unarisen skillful qualities, they’ll lead to harm.’ ‘If arisen skillful qualities cease in me, they’ll lead to harm.’

<!-- @segment sn16.2:3.3 -->

That’s how you’re not prudent.

<!-- @segment sn16.2:3.4 -->

That’s how without being keen and prudent you can’t achieve awakening, extinguishment, and the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.

<!-- @segment sn16.2:4.1 -->

And how are you keen?

<!-- @segment sn16.2:4.2 -->

Take a mendicant who fosters keenness by thinking: ‘If unarisen unskillful qualities arise in me, they’ll lead to harm.’ ‘If I don’t give up arisen unskillful qualities, they’ll lead to harm.’ ‘If I don’t give rise to unarisen skillful qualities, they’ll lead to harm.’ ‘If arisen skillful qualities cease in me, they’ll lead to harm.’

<!-- @segment sn16.2:4.3 -->

That’s how you’re keen.

<!-- @segment sn16.2:5.1 -->

And how are you prudent?

<!-- @segment sn16.2:5.2 -->

Take a mendicant who fosters prudence by thinking: ‘If unarisen unskillful qualities arise in me, they’ll lead to harm.’ ‘If I don’t give up arisen unskillful qualities, they’ll lead to harm.’ ‘If I don’t give rise to unarisen skillful qualities, they’ll lead to harm.’ ‘If arisen skillful qualities cease in me, they’ll lead to harm.’

<!-- @segment sn16.2:5.3 -->

That’s how you’re prudent.

<!-- @segment sn16.2:5.4 -->

That’s how if you’re keen and prudent you can achieve awakening, extinguishment, and the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.”
