---
slug: sn16.6
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Advice
---

<!-- @segment sn16.6:1.1 -->

Near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove.

<!-- @segment sn16.6:1.2 -->

Then Venerable Mahākassapa went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

<!-- @segment sn16.6:1.3 -->

“Kassapa, advise the mendicants!

<!-- @segment sn16.6:1.4 -->

Give them a Dhamma talk!

<!-- @segment sn16.6:1.5 -->

Either you or I should advise the mendicants

<!-- @segment sn16.6:1.6 -->

and give them a Dhamma talk.”

<!-- @segment sn16.6:2.1 -->

“Sir, the mendicants these days are hard to admonish, having qualities that make them hard to admonish. They’re impatient, and don’t take instruction respectfully.

<!-- @segment sn16.6:2.2 -->

Take the monk named Bhaṇḍa, Ānanda’s protégé. He’s been competing in studies with the monk named Abhiñjika, Anuruddha’s protégé. They say:

<!-- @segment sn16.6:2.3 -->

‘Come on, monk, who can speak more? Who can speak better? Who can speak longer?’”

<!-- @segment sn16.6:3.1 -->

So the Buddha addressed one of the monks,

<!-- @segment sn16.6:3.2 -->

“Please, monk, in my name tell the monk called Bhaṇḍa, Ānanda’s protégé, and the monk called Abhiñjika, Anuruddha’s protégé that

<!-- @segment sn16.6:3.3 -->

the teacher summons them.”

<!-- @segment sn16.6:3.4 -->

“Yes, sir,” that monk replied. He went to those monks and said,

<!-- @segment sn16.6:3.5 -->

“Venerables, the teacher summons you.”

<!-- @segment sn16.6:4.1 -->

“Yes, reverend,” those monks replied. They went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to them:

<!-- @segment sn16.6:4.2 -->

“Is it really true, monks, that you’ve been competing in studies, saying:

<!-- @segment sn16.6:4.3 -->

‘Come on, monk, who can speak more? Who can speak better? Who can speak longer?’”

<!-- @segment sn16.6:4.4 -->

“Yes, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn16.6:4.5 -->

“Have you ever known me to teach the Dhamma like this:

<!-- @segment sn16.6:4.6 -->

‘Please mendicants, compete in studies to

<!-- @segment sn16.6:4.7 -->

see who can recite more and better and longer’?”

<!-- @segment sn16.6:4.8 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn16.6:4.9 -->

“If you’ve never known me to teach the Dhamma like this, what then do you know and see, you futile men, that after going forth in such a well explained teaching and training you’d compete in studies to

<!-- @segment sn16.6:4.10 -->

see who can speak more and better and longer?”

<!-- @segment sn16.6:5.1 -->

Then those monks bowed with their heads at the Buddha’s feet and said,

<!-- @segment sn16.6:5.2 -->

“We made a mistake, sir. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of us in that after going forth in such a well explained teaching and training we competed in studies to

<!-- @segment sn16.6:5.3 -->

see who can speak more and better and longer.

<!-- @segment sn16.6:5.4 -->

Please, sir, accept our mistake for what it is, so we will restrain ourselves in future.”

<!-- @segment sn16.6:6.1 -->

“Indeed, monks, you made a mistake. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of you to act in that way.

<!-- @segment sn16.6:6.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn16.6:6.3 -->

But since you have recognized your mistake for what it is, and have dealt with it properly, I accept it.

<!-- @segment sn16.6:6.4 -->

For it is growth in the training of the Noble One to recognize a mistake for what it is, deal with it properly, and commit to restraint in the future.”
