---
slug: sn20.7
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Drum Called Plugger
---

<!-- @segment sn20.7:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn20.7:1.2 -->

“Once upon a time, mendicants, the Dasārahas had a <em>mridangam</em> drum called the Plugger.

<!-- @segment sn20.7:1.3 -->

When the Plugger cracked, the Dasārahas patched it with another plug.

<!-- @segment sn20.7:1.4 -->

Eventually, there came a time when the original wooden shell for the drumskin disappeared

<!-- @segment sn20.7:1.5 -->

and all that was left of the <em>mridangam</em> Plugger was a mass of plugs.

<!-- @segment sn20.7:1.6 -->

In the same way, in a future time there will be mendicants who won’t want to listen when discourses spoken by the Realized One—deep, profound, transcendent, dealing with emptiness—are being recited. They won’t actively listen or try to understand, nor will they think those teachings are worth learning and memorizing.

<!-- @segment sn20.7:2.1 -->

But when discourses composed by poets—poetry, with fancy words and phrases, composed by outsiders or spoken by disciples—are being recited they will want to listen. They’ll actively listen and try to understand, and they’ll think those teachings are worth learning and memorizing.

<!-- @segment sn20.7:2.2 -->

And that is how the discourses spoken by the Realized One—deep, profound, transcendent, dealing with emptiness—will disappear.

<!-- @segment sn20.7:2.3 -->

So you should train like this:

<!-- @segment sn20.7:2.4 -->

‘When discourses spoken by the Realized One—deep, profound, transcendent, dealing with emptiness—are being recited we will want to listen. We will actively listen and trying to understand, and we will think those teachings are worth learning and memorizing.’

<!-- @segment sn20.7:2.5 -->

That’s how you should train.”
