---
slug: sn20.10
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: A Cat
---

<!-- @segment sn20.10:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn20.10:1.2 -->

Now at that time a certain mendicant socialized with families too often.

<!-- @segment sn20.10:1.3 -->

The mendicants said to him,

<!-- @segment sn20.10:1.4 -->

“Venerable, don’t socialize with families too often.”

<!-- @segment sn20.10:1.5 -->

But that mendicant, when spoken to by the mendicants, did not stop.

<!-- @segment sn20.10:1.6 -->

And then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. The Buddha said:

<!-- @segment sn20.10:1.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn20.10:1.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn20.10:1.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn20.10:1.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn20.10:2.1 -->

“Once upon a time, mendicants, a cat was standing by an alley or a drain or a dustbin hunting a little mouse, thinking,

<!-- @segment sn20.10:2.2 -->

‘When that little mouse comes out to feed, I’ll catch it right there and eat it!’

<!-- @segment sn20.10:2.3 -->

And then that little mouse came out to feed.

<!-- @segment sn20.10:2.4 -->

The cat caught it and hastily swallowed it without chewing.

<!-- @segment sn20.10:2.5 -->

But that little mouse ate its intestines and mesentery,

<!-- @segment sn20.10:2.6 -->

resulting in death and deadly pain.

<!-- @segment sn20.10:3.1 -->

In the same way, take a certain monk who robes up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, enters the village or town for alms without guarding body, speech, and mind, without establishing mindfulness, and without restraining the sense faculties.

<!-- @segment sn20.10:3.2 -->

There he sees a lady scantily clad, with revealing clothes.

<!-- @segment sn20.10:3.3 -->

Lust infects his mind,

<!-- @segment sn20.10:3.4 -->

resulting in death or deadly pain.

<!-- @segment sn20.10:3.5 -->

For it is death in the training of the Noble One to disavow the training and return to a lesser life.

<!-- @segment sn20.10:3.6 -->

And it is deadly pain to commit one of the corrupt offenses

<!-- @segment sn20.10:3.7 -->

for which rehabilitation is possible.

<!-- @segment sn20.10:3.8 -->

So you should train like this:

<!-- @segment sn20.10:3.9 -->

‘We will enter the village or town for alms guarding body, speech, and mind, establishing mindfulness, and restraining the sense faculties.’

<!-- @segment sn20.10:3.10 -->

That’s how you should train.”
