---
slug: sn20.8
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Wood Blocks
---

<!-- @segment sn20.8:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn20.8:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

<!-- @segment sn20.8:1.3 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,

<!-- @segment sn20.8:1.4 -->

“Mendicants!”

<!-- @segment sn20.8:1.5 -->

“Venerable sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment sn20.8:1.6 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment sn20.8:2.1 -->

“Mendicants, these days the Licchavis live using wood blocks as pillows, and they exercise diligently and keenly.

<!-- @segment sn20.8:2.2 -->

King Ajātasattu of Magadha, son of the princess of Videha, finds no vulnerability, he’s got no opportunity.

<!-- @segment sn20.8:2.3 -->

But in the future the Licchavis will become delicate, with soft and tender hands and feet.

<!-- @segment sn20.8:2.4 -->

They’ll sleep on soft beds with down pillows until the sun comes up.

<!-- @segment sn20.8:2.5 -->

King Ajātasattu of Magadha, son of the princess of Videha, will find a vulnerability and get an opportunity.

<!-- @segment sn20.8:3.1 -->

These days the mendicants live using wood blocks as pillows, and they meditate diligently and keenly.

<!-- @segment sn20.8:3.2 -->

Māra the Wicked finds no vulnerability, he’s got no opportunity.

<!-- @segment sn20.8:3.3 -->

But in the future the mendicants will become delicate, with soft and tender hands and feet.

<!-- @segment sn20.8:3.4 -->

They’ll sleep on soft beds with down pillows until the sun comes up.

<!-- @segment sn20.8:3.5 -->

Māra the Wicked will find a vulnerability and get an opportunity.

<!-- @segment sn20.8:3.6 -->

So you should train like this:

<!-- @segment sn20.8:3.7 -->

‘We will live using wood blocks as pillows, and we will meditate diligently and keenly.’

<!-- @segment sn20.8:3.8 -->

That’s how you should train.”
