---
slug: sn21.4
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: A Junior Mendicant
---

<!-- @segment sn21.4:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn21.4:1.2 -->

Now at that time a certain junior monk, after his meal, on his return from almsround, entered his dwelling, where he adhered to passivity and silence. And he didn’t help the mendicants out when it was time to sew robes.

<!-- @segment sn21.4:1.3 -->

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened.

<!-- @segment sn21.4:1.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn21.4:2.1 -->

So the Buddha addressed one of the monks,

<!-- @segment sn21.4:2.2 -->

“Please, monk, in my name tell that monk that the Teacher summons him.”

<!-- @segment sn21.4:2.3 -->

“Yes, sir,” that monk replied. He went to that monk and said to him,

<!-- @segment sn21.4:2.4 -->

“Reverend, the teacher summons you.”

<!-- @segment sn21.4:2.5 -->

“Yes, reverend,” that monk replied. He went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

<!-- @segment sn21.4:2.6 -->

“Is it really true, monk, that after your meal, on your return from almsround, you entered your dwelling, where you adhered to passivity and silence, and you didn’t help the mendicants out when it was time to sew robes?”

<!-- @segment sn21.4:2.7 -->

“Sir, I am doing my own work.”

<!-- @segment sn21.4:3.1 -->

Then the Buddha, knowing that monk’s train of thought, addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment sn21.4:3.2 -->

“Mendicants, don’t complain about this monk.

<!-- @segment sn21.4:3.3 -->

This monk gets the four absorptions—blissful meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind—when he wants, without trouble or difficulty. He has realized the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life, and lives having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.”

<!-- @segment sn21.4:4.1 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment sn21.4:4.2 -->

Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

<!-- @segment sn21.4:5.1 -->

“Not by being slack,

<!-- @segment sn21.4:5.2 -->

or with little strength

<!-- @segment sn21.4:5.3 -->

may this be realized—extinguishment,

<!-- @segment sn21.4:5.4 -->

the release from all suffering.

<!-- @segment sn21.4:6.1 -->

This young monk,

<!-- @segment sn21.4:6.2 -->

this best of men,

<!-- @segment sn21.4:6.3 -->

bears his final body,

<!-- @segment sn21.4:6.4 -->

having vanquished Māra with his legions.”
