---
slug: sn21.10
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Senior In Name Only
---

<!-- @segment sn21.10:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground.

<!-- @segment sn21.10:1.2 -->

Now at that time there was a certain mendicant who was Senior in name only. He lived alone and praised living alone.

<!-- @segment sn21.10:1.3 -->

He entered the village for alms alone, returned alone, sat in private alone, and focussed on walking mindfully alone.

<!-- @segment sn21.10:1.4 -->

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment sn21.10:1.5 -->

“Sir, there’s a certain mendicant who is Senior in name only. He lives alone and praises living alone.”

<!-- @segment sn21.10:2.1 -->

So the Buddha addressed one of the monks,

<!-- @segment sn21.10:2.2 -->

“Please, monk, in my name tell the mendicant Senior that

<!-- @segment sn21.10:2.3 -->

the teacher summons him.”

<!-- @segment sn21.10:2.4 -->

“Yes, sir,” that monk replied. He went to Venerable Senior and said to him,

<!-- @segment sn21.10:2.5 -->

“Reverend Senior, the teacher summons you.”

<!-- @segment sn21.10:2.6 -->

“Yes, reverend,” that monk replied. He went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

<!-- @segment sn21.10:2.7 -->

“Is it really true, Senior, that you live alone and praise living alone?”

<!-- @segment sn21.10:2.8 -->

“Yes, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn21.10:2.9 -->

“But in what way do you live alone and praise living alone?”

<!-- @segment sn21.10:2.10 -->

“Well, sir, I enter the village for alms alone, return alone, sit in private alone, and focus on walking mindfully alone.

<!-- @segment sn21.10:2.11 -->

That’s how I live alone and praise living alone.”

<!-- @segment sn21.10:3.1 -->

“That is a kind of living alone, I don’t deny it.

<!-- @segment sn21.10:3.2 -->

But as to how living alone is fulfilled in detail,

<!-- @segment sn21.10:3.3 -->

listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment sn21.10:3.4 -->

“Yes, sir,” he replied.

<!-- @segment sn21.10:3.5 -->

“And how, Senior, is living alone fulfilled in detail?

<!-- @segment sn21.10:3.6 -->

It’s when what’s in the past is given up, what’s in the future is relinquished, and desire and greed for present incarnations is eliminated.

<!-- @segment sn21.10:3.7 -->

That’s how living alone is fulfilled in detail.”

<!-- @segment sn21.10:4.1 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment sn21.10:4.2 -->

Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

<!-- @segment sn21.10:5.1 -->

“The vanquisher of all, knower of all, so very intelligent,

<!-- @segment sn21.10:5.2 -->

is unsullied in the midst of all things.

<!-- @segment sn21.10:5.3 -->

He’s given up all, freed in the ending of craving:

<!-- @segment sn21.10:5.4 -->

I declare that man to be one who lives alone.”
