---
slug: sn21.7
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Visākha, Pañcāli’s Son
description: The Buddha teaches on Venerable Visākha, Pañcāli’s Son in the Connected Discourses with Bhikkhus, illustrating qualities and conduct on the path to liberation.
qualities: wholesome, immaturity, wisdom
theme: story, urgency
---

<!-- @segment sn21.7:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn21.7:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

<!-- @segment sn21.7:1.3 -->

Now at that time Venerable Visākha, Pañcāli’s son, was educating, encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the mendicants in the assembly hall with a Dhamma talk. His words were polished, clear, articulate, expressing the meaning, comprehensive, and independent.

<!-- @segment sn21.7:2.1 -->

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to the assembly hall. He sat down on the seat spread out,

<!-- @segment sn21.7:2.2 -->

and addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment sn21.7:2.3 -->

“Mendicants, who was educating, encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the mendicants in the assembly hall with a Dhamma talk?”

<!-- @segment sn21.7:2.4 -->

“Sir, it was Venerable Visākha, Pañcāli’s son.”

<!-- @segment sn21.7:3.1 -->

Then the Buddha said to Visākha:

<!-- @segment sn21.7:3.2 -->

“Good, good, Visākha!

<!-- @segment sn21.7:3.3 -->

It’s good that you educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire the mendicants in the assembly hall with a Dhamma talk, with words that are polished, clear, articulate, expressing the meaning, comprehensive, and independent.”

<!-- @segment sn21.7:4.1 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment sn21.7:4.2 -->

Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

<!-- @segment sn21.7:5.1 -->

“Though an astute person is mixed up with fools,

<!-- @segment sn21.7:5.2 -->

they don’t know unless he speaks.

<!-- @segment sn21.7:5.3 -->

But when he speaks they know,

<!-- @segment sn21.7:5.4 -->

he’s teaching the state free of death.

<!-- @segment sn21.7:6.1 -->

He should speak and illustrate the teaching,

<!-- @segment sn21.7:6.2 -->

holding up the banner of the seers.

<!-- @segment sn21.7:6.3 -->

Words well spoken are the seers’ banner,

<!-- @segment sn21.7:6.4 -->

for the teaching is the banner of the seers.”
