---
slug: sn22.43
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Be Your Own Island
---

<!-- @segment sn22.43:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn22.43:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, be your own island, your own refuge, with no other refuge. Let the teaching be your island and your refuge, with no other refuge.

<!-- @segment sn22.43:1.3 -->

When you live like this, you should examine rationally: ‘From what are sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress born and produced?’

<!-- @segment sn22.43:2.1 -->

And, mendicants, from what are sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress born and produced?

<!-- @segment sn22.43:2.2 -->

It’s when an unlearned ordinary person has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve not seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the true persons.

<!-- @segment sn22.43:2.3 -->

They regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form.

<!-- @segment sn22.43:2.4 -->

But that form of theirs decays and perishes,

<!-- @segment sn22.43:2.5 -->

which gives rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

<!-- @segment sn22.43:2.6 -->

They regard feeling as self …

<!-- @segment sn22.43:2.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.43:2.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.43:2.9 -->

They regard perception as self …

<!-- @segment sn22.43:2.10 -->

They regard choices as self …

<!-- @segment sn22.43:2.11 -->

They regard consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.43:2.12 -->

But that consciousness of theirs decays and perishes,

<!-- @segment sn22.43:2.13 -->

which gives rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

<!-- @segment sn22.43:3.1 -->

Sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are given up when you understand the impermanence of form—its perishing, fading away, and cessation—and you truly see with right understanding that all form, whether past or present, is impermanent, suffering, and perishable.

<!-- @segment sn22.43:3.2 -->

When these things are given up there’s no anxiety. Without anxiety you live happily. A mendicant who lives happily is said to be quenched in that respect.

<!-- @segment sn22.43:3.3 -->

Sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are given up when you understand the impermanence of feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.43:3.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.43:3.5 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.43:3.6 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.43:3.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.43:3.8 -->

consciousness—its perishing, fading away, and cessation—and you truly see with right understanding that all consciousness, whether past or present, is impermanent, suffering, and perishable.

<!-- @segment sn22.43:3.9 -->

When these things are given up there’s no anxiety. Without anxiety you live happily. A mendicant who lives happily is said to be quenched in that respect.”
