---
slug: sn22.94
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Flowers
---

<!-- @segment sn22.94:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn22.94:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, I do not dispute with the world; it is the world that disputes with me.

<!-- @segment sn22.94:1.3 -->

When your speech is in line with the teaching you do not dispute with anyone in the world.

<!-- @segment sn22.94:1.4 -->

What the astute deem as not existing, I too say does not exist.

<!-- @segment sn22.94:1.5 -->

What the astute deem as existing, I too say exists.

<!-- @segment sn22.94:2.1 -->

And what do the astute deem as not existing, which I too say does not exist?

<!-- @segment sn22.94:2.2 -->

Form that is permanent, everlasting, eternal, and imperishable.

<!-- @segment sn22.94:2.3 -->

Feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.94:2.4 -->

Perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.94:2.5 -->

Choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.94:2.6 -->

Consciousness that is permanent, everlasting, eternal, and imperishable.

<!-- @segment sn22.94:2.7 -->

This is what the astute deem as not existing, which I too say does not exist.

<!-- @segment sn22.94:3.1 -->

And what do the astute deem as existing, which I too say exists?

<!-- @segment sn22.94:3.2 -->

Form that is impermanent, suffering, and perishable.

<!-- @segment sn22.94:3.3 -->

Feeling … Perception … Choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.94:3.4 -->

Consciousness that is impermanent, suffering, and perishable.

<!-- @segment sn22.94:3.5 -->

This is what the astute deem as existing, which I too say exists.

<!-- @segment sn22.94:4.1 -->

There is a worldly phenomenon in the world that the Realized One understands and comprehends.

<!-- @segment sn22.94:4.2 -->

Then he explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals it.

<!-- @segment sn22.94:5.1 -->

And what is that worldly phenomenon in the world?

<!-- @segment sn22.94:5.2 -->

Form is a worldly phenomenon in the world that the Realized One understands and comprehends.

<!-- @segment sn22.94:5.3 -->

Then he explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals it.

<!-- @segment sn22.94:6.1 -->

This being so, what can I do about a foolish ordinary person, blind and sightless, who does not know or see?

<!-- @segment sn22.94:6.2 -->

Feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.94:6.3 -->

Perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.94:6.4 -->

Choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.94:6.5 -->

Consciousness is a worldly phenomenon in the world that the Realized One understands and comprehends.

<!-- @segment sn22.94:6.6 -->

Then he explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals it.

<!-- @segment sn22.94:7.1 -->

This being so, what can I do about a foolish ordinary person, blind and sightless, who does not know or see?

<!-- @segment sn22.94:8.1 -->

Suppose there was a blue water lily, or a pink or white lotus. Though it sprouted and grew in the water, it would rise up above the water and stand with no water clinging to it.

<!-- @segment sn22.94:8.2 -->

In the same way, though I was born and grew up in the world, I live having mastered the world, unsullied by the world.”
