---
slug: sn22.103
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Ends
---

<!-- @segment sn22.103:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn22.103:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, there are these four ends.

<!-- @segment sn22.103:1.3 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment sn22.103:1.4 -->

The end that is substantial reality, the end that is the origin of substantial reality, the end that is the cessation of substantial reality, and the end that is the practice that leads to the cessation of substantial reality.

<!-- @segment sn22.103:1.5 -->

And what is the end that is substantial reality?

<!-- @segment sn22.103:1.6 -->

It should be said: the five grasping aggregates.

<!-- @segment sn22.103:1.7 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment sn22.103:1.8 -->

That is, the grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.103:1.9 -->

This is called the end that is substantial reality.

<!-- @segment sn22.103:2.1 -->

And what is the end that is the origin of substantial reality?

<!-- @segment sn22.103:2.2 -->

It’s the craving that leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure there wherever it alights. That is,

<!-- @segment sn22.103:2.3 -->

craving for sensual pleasures, craving for existence, and craving for nonexistence.

<!-- @segment sn22.103:2.4 -->

This is called the end that is the origin of substantial reality.

<!-- @segment sn22.103:3.1 -->

And what is the end that is the cessation of substantial reality?

<!-- @segment sn22.103:3.2 -->

It’s the fading away and cessation of that very same craving no residue left behind; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not clinging to it.

<!-- @segment sn22.103:3.3 -->

This is called the end that is the cessation of substantial reality.

<!-- @segment sn22.103:4.1 -->

And what is the end that is the practice that leads to the cessation of substantial reality?

<!-- @segment sn22.103:4.2 -->

It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:

<!-- @segment sn22.103:4.3 -->

right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

<!-- @segment sn22.103:4.4 -->

This is called the end that is the practice that leads to the cessation of substantial reality.

<!-- @segment sn22.103:4.5 -->

These are the four ends.”
