---
slug: sn22.7
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Anxiety Because of Grasping
---

<!-- @segment sn22.7:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn22.7:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, I will teach you how grasping leads to anxiety, and how not grasping leads to freedom from anxiety.

<!-- @segment sn22.7:1.3 -->

Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment sn22.7:1.4 -->

“Yes, sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment sn22.7:1.5 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment sn22.7:2.1 -->

“And how does grasping lead to anxiety?

<!-- @segment sn22.7:2.2 -->

It’s when an unlearned ordinary person has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve not seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the true persons.

<!-- @segment sn22.7:2.3 -->

They regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form.

<!-- @segment sn22.7:2.4 -->

But that form of theirs decays and perishes,

<!-- @segment sn22.7:2.5 -->

and consciousness latches on to the perishing of form.

<!-- @segment sn22.7:2.6 -->

Anxieties occupy their mind, born of latching on to the perishing of form, and originating in accordance with natural principles.

<!-- @segment sn22.7:2.7 -->

So they become frightened, worried, concerned, and anxious because of grasping.

<!-- @segment sn22.7:3.1 -->

They regard feeling as self …

<!-- @segment sn22.7:3.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.7:3.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.7:3.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.7:3.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.7:4.1 -->

They regard perception as self …

<!-- @segment sn22.7:4.2 -->

They regard choices as self …

<!-- @segment sn22.7:4.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.7:4.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.7:4.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.7:4.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.7:5.1 -->

They regard consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.7:5.2 -->

But that consciousness of theirs decays and perishes,

<!-- @segment sn22.7:5.3 -->

and consciousness latches on to the perishing of consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.7:5.4 -->

Anxieties occupy their mind, born of latching on to the perishing of consciousness, and originating in accordance with natural principles.

<!-- @segment sn22.7:5.5 -->

So they become frightened, worried, concerned, and anxious because of grasping.

<!-- @segment sn22.7:5.6 -->

That’s how grasping leads to anxiety.

<!-- @segment sn22.7:6.1 -->

And how does not grasping lead to freedom from anxiety?

<!-- @segment sn22.7:6.2 -->

It’s when a learned noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve seen true persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true persons.

<!-- @segment sn22.7:6.3 -->

They don’t regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form.

<!-- @segment sn22.7:6.4 -->

When that form of theirs decays and perishes,

<!-- @segment sn22.7:6.5 -->

consciousness doesn’t latch on to the perishing of form.

<!-- @segment sn22.7:6.6 -->

Anxieties—born of latching on to the perishing of form and originating in accordance with natural principles—don’t occupy their mind.

<!-- @segment sn22.7:6.7 -->

So they don’t become frightened, worried, concerned, or anxious because of grasping.

<!-- @segment sn22.7:7.1 -->

They don’t regard feeling as self …

<!-- @segment sn22.7:7.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.7:7.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.7:7.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.7:7.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.7:8.1 -->

They don’t regard perception as self …

<!-- @segment sn22.7:8.2 -->

They don’t regard choices as self …

<!-- @segment sn22.7:8.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.7:8.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.7:8.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.7:8.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.7:8.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.7:9.1 -->

They don’t regard consciousness as self …

<!-- @segment sn22.7:9.2 -->

When that consciousness of theirs decays and perishes,

<!-- @segment sn22.7:9.3 -->

consciousness doesn’t latch on to the perishing of consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.7:9.4 -->

Anxieties—born of latching on to the perishing of consciousness and originating in accordance with natural principles—don’t occupy their mind.

<!-- @segment sn22.7:9.5 -->

So they don’t become frightened, worried, concerned, or anxious because of grasping.

<!-- @segment sn22.7:9.6 -->

That’s how not grasping leads to freedom from anxiety.”
