---
slug: sn22.58
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Fully Awakened Buddha
---

<!-- @segment sn22.58:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn22.58:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha is freed by not grasping, due to disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding form. They’re called a fully awakened Buddha.

<!-- @segment sn22.58:1.3 -->

A mendicant freed by wisdom is also freed by not grasping, due to disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding form. They’re called a mendicant freed by wisdom.

<!-- @segment sn22.58:2.1 -->

A Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha is freed by not grasping, due to disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.58:2.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.58:3.1 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.58:3.2 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.58:3.3 -->

consciousness. They’re called a fully awakened Buddha.

<!-- @segment sn22.58:3.4 -->

A mendicant freed by wisdom is also freed by not grasping, due to disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding consciousness. They’re called a mendicant freed by wisdom.

<!-- @segment sn22.58:4.1 -->

What, then, is the difference between a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha, and a mendicant freed by wisdom?”

<!-- @segment sn22.58:4.2 -->

“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge. Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The mendicants will listen and remember it.”

<!-- @segment sn22.58:4.3 -->

“Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment sn22.58:4.4 -->

“Yes, sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment sn22.58:4.5 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment sn22.58:5.1 -->

“The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha gave rise to the unarisen path, gave birth to the unborn path, and explained the unexplained path. He is the knower of the path, the discoverer of the path, the expert on the path.

<!-- @segment sn22.58:5.2 -->

And now the disciples live following the path; they acquire it later.

<!-- @segment sn22.58:5.3 -->

This is the difference between a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha, and a mendicant freed by wisdom.”
