---
slug: sn22.88
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Assaji
description: The Buddha teaches on with assaji, applying the analysis of the five aggregates—form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness—to insight and release.
qualities: suffering, regret, ethical conduct, compassion, collectedness
theme: wisdom, story
---

<!-- @segment sn22.88:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground.

<!-- @segment sn22.88:1.2 -->

Now at that time Venerable Assaji was staying in a monastery built by a Kassapa, and he was sick, suffering, gravely ill.

<!-- @segment sn22.88:1.3 -->

Then he addressed his carers:

<!-- @segment sn22.88:1.4 -->

“Please, reverends, go to the Buddha, and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Say to him:

<!-- @segment sn22.88:1.5 -->

‘Sir, the mendicant Assaji is sick, suffering, gravely ill.

<!-- @segment sn22.88:1.6 -->

He bows with his head to your feet.’

<!-- @segment sn22.88:1.7 -->

And then say:

<!-- @segment sn22.88:1.8 -->

‘Sir, please go to the mendicant Assaji out of sympathy.’”

<!-- @segment sn22.88:1.9 -->

“Yes, reverend,” those monks replied. They did as he asked.

<!-- @segment sn22.88:1.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.88:1.11 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.88:1.12 -->

The Buddha consented with silence.

<!-- @segment sn22.88:2.1 -->

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to Venerable Assaji.

<!-- @segment sn22.88:2.2 -->

Venerable Assaji saw the Buddha coming off in the distance,

<!-- @segment sn22.88:2.3 -->

and stirred in his cot.

<!-- @segment sn22.88:2.4 -->

But the Buddha said to him,

<!-- @segment sn22.88:2.5 -->

“It’s all right, Assaji, don’t get up.

<!-- @segment sn22.88:2.6 -->

There are some seats spread out, I will sit there.”

<!-- @segment sn22.88:2.7 -->

He sat on the seat spread out and said,

<!-- @segment sn22.88:2.8 -->

“I hope you’re keeping well, Assaji; I hope you’re all right. And I hope the pain is fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not its growing.”

<!-- @segment sn22.88:3.1 -->

“Sir, I’m not all right, I’m not getting by. My pain is terrible and growing, not fading, its growing is evident, not its fading.”

<!-- @segment sn22.88:3.2 -->

“I hope you don’t have any remorse or regret?”

<!-- @segment sn22.88:3.3 -->

“Indeed, sir, I have no little remorse and regret.”

<!-- @segment sn22.88:3.4 -->

“I hope you have no reason to blame yourself when it comes to ethical conduct?”

<!-- @segment sn22.88:3.5 -->

“No sir, I have no reason to blame myself when it comes to ethical conduct.”

<!-- @segment sn22.88:3.6 -->

“In that case, Assaji, why do you have remorse and regret?”

<!-- @segment sn22.88:3.7 -->

“Sir, before my time of illness I meditated having completely stilled the physical process. But now I can’t get immersion.

<!-- @segment sn22.88:3.8 -->

Since I can’t get immersion, I think:

<!-- @segment sn22.88:3.9 -->

‘May I not decline!’”

<!-- @segment sn22.88:3.10 -->

“There are, Assaji, ascetics and brahmins for whom samādhi is the essence, equating immersion with the ascetic life. They think:

<!-- @segment sn22.88:3.11 -->

‘May we not decline!’

<!-- @segment sn22.88:4.1 -->

What do you think, Assaji?

<!-- @segment sn22.88:4.2 -->

Is form permanent or impermanent?”

<!-- @segment sn22.88:4.3 -->

“Impermanent, sir.” …

<!-- @segment sn22.88:4.4 -->

“Is consciousness permanent or impermanent?” …

<!-- @segment sn22.88:4.5 -->

“So you should truly see …

<!-- @segment sn22.88:4.6 -->

Seeing this …

<!-- @segment sn22.88:4.7 -->

They understand: ‘… there is nothing further for this place.’

<!-- @segment sn22.88:4.8 -->

If they feel a pleasant feeling, they understand that it’s impermanent, that they’re not attached to it, and that they don’t relish it.

<!-- @segment sn22.88:4.9 -->

If they feel a painful feeling, they understand that it’s impermanent, that they’re not attached to it, and that they don’t relish it.

<!-- @segment sn22.88:4.10 -->

If they feel a neutral feeling, they understand that it’s impermanent, that they’re not attached to it, and that they don’t relish it.

<!-- @segment sn22.88:4.11 -->

If they feel a pleasant feeling, they feel it detached.

<!-- @segment sn22.88:4.12 -->

If they feel a painful feeling, they feel it detached.

<!-- @segment sn22.88:4.13 -->

If they feel a neutral feeling, they feel it detached.

<!-- @segment sn22.88:4.14 -->

Feeling the end of the body draw close, they understand: ‘I feel the end of the body draw close.’ Feeling the end of life draw close, they understand: ‘I feel the end of life draw close.’

<!-- @segment sn22.88:4.15 -->

They understand: ‘When my body breaks up and my life is over, everything that’s felt, being no longer relished, will become cool right here.’

<!-- @segment sn22.88:5.1 -->

Suppose an oil lamp depended on oil and a wick to burn.

<!-- @segment sn22.88:5.2 -->

As the oil and the wick are used up, it would be extinguished due to not being fed.

<!-- @segment sn22.88:5.3 -->

In the same way, feeling the end of the body draw close, they understand: ‘I feel the end of the body draw close.’ Feeling the end of life draw close, they understand: ‘I feel the end of life draw close.’

<!-- @segment sn22.88:5.4 -->

They understand: ‘When my body breaks up and my life is over, everything that’s felt, being no longer relished, will become cool right here.’”
