---
slug: sn22.57
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Seven Cases
description: The Buddha teaches that each of the five aggregates is impermanent, suffering, and not-self, and should be truly seen with right understanding until the mind is freed by not grasping.
qualities: ending, desire, dispassion, giving, giving up, happiness
theme: wisdom, urgency
---

<!-- @segment sn22.57:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, in this teaching and training a mendicant who is skilled in seven cases and who examines in three ways is called consummate, accomplished, a supreme person.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:1.3 -->

And how is a mendicant skilled in seven cases?

<!-- @segment sn22.57:1.4 -->

It’s when a mendicant understands form, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:1.5 -->

They understand form’s gratification, drawback, and escape.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:1.6 -->

They understand feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.57:1.7 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.57:1.8 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.57:1.9 -->

consciousness, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:1.10 -->

They understand consciousness’s gratification, drawback, and escape.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:2.1 -->

And what is form?

<!-- @segment sn22.57:2.2 -->

The four principal states, and form derived from the four principal states.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:2.3 -->

This is called form.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:2.4 -->

Form originates from fuel.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:2.5 -->

When fuel ceases, form ceases.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:2.6 -->

The practice that leads to the cessation of form is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:

<!-- @segment sn22.57:2.7 -->

right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:3.1 -->

The pleasure and happiness that arise from form: this is its gratification.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:3.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:3.3 -->

That form is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:3.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:3.5 -->

Removing and giving up desire and greed for form: this is its escape.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:3.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:4.1 -->

Those ascetics and brahmins who have directly known form in this way—and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation;

<!-- @segment sn22.57:4.2 -->

its gratification, drawback, and escape—and are practicing for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding form: they are practicing well.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:4.3 -->

Those who practice well have a footing in this teaching and training.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:5.1 -->

Those ascetics and brahmins who have directly known form in this way—and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation;

<!-- @segment sn22.57:5.2 -->

its gratification, drawback, and escape—and due to disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding form, are freed by not grasping: they are well freed.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:5.3 -->

Those who are well freed are consummate ones.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:5.4 -->

For consummate ones, there is no cycle of rebirths to be found.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:6.1 -->

And what is feeling?

<!-- @segment sn22.57:6.2 -->

There are these six classes of feeling:

<!-- @segment sn22.57:6.3 -->

feeling born of eye contact …

<!-- @segment sn22.57:6.4 -->

feeling born of mind contact.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:6.5 -->

This is called feeling.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:6.6 -->

Feeling originates from contact.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:6.7 -->

When contact ceases, feeling ceases.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:6.8 -->

The practice that leads to the cessation of feelings is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:

<!-- @segment sn22.57:6.9 -->

right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:7.1 -->

The pleasure and happiness that arise from feeling: this is its gratification.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:7.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:7.3 -->

That feeling is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:7.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:7.5 -->

Removing and giving up desire and greed for feeling: this is its escape. …

<!-- @segment sn22.57:7.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:8.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:8.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:8.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:9.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:9.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:10.1 -->

And what is perception?

<!-- @segment sn22.57:10.2 -->

There are these six classes of perception:

<!-- @segment sn22.57:10.3 -->

perceptions of sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:10.4 -->

This is called perception.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:10.5 -->

Perception originates from contact.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:10.6 -->

When contact ceases, perception ceases.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:10.7 -->

The practice that leads to the cessation of perceptions is simply this noble eightfold path …

<!-- @segment sn22.57:10.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:10.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:11.1 -->

And what are choices?

<!-- @segment sn22.57:11.2 -->

There are these six classes of intention:

<!-- @segment sn22.57:11.3 -->

intention regarding sights …

<!-- @segment sn22.57:11.4 -->

intention regarding ideas.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:11.5 -->

These are called choices.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:11.6 -->

Choices originate from contact.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:11.7 -->

When contact ceases, choices cease.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:11.8 -->

The practice that leads to the cessation of choices is simply this noble eightfold path …

<!-- @segment sn22.57:11.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:12.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:12.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:12.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:12.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:12.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:12.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:13.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:13.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:13.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:14.1 -->

And what is consciousness?

<!-- @segment sn22.57:14.2 -->

There are these six classes of consciousness:

<!-- @segment sn22.57:14.3 -->

eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:14.4 -->

This is called consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:14.5 -->

Consciousness originates from name and form.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:14.6 -->

When name and form cease, consciousness ceases.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:14.7 -->

The practice that leads to the cessation of consciousness is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:

<!-- @segment sn22.57:14.8 -->

right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:15.1 -->

The pleasure and happiness that arise from consciousness: this is its gratification.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:15.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:15.3 -->

That consciousness is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:15.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:15.5 -->

Removing and giving up desire and greed for consciousness: this is its escape.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:15.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.57:16.1 -->

Those ascetics and brahmins who have directly known consciousness in this way—and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation;

<!-- @segment sn22.57:16.2 -->

its gratification, drawback, and escape—and are practicing for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding consciousness: they are practicing well.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:16.3 -->

Those who practice well have a footing in this teaching and training.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:17.1 -->

Those ascetics and brahmins who have directly known consciousness in this way—and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation;

<!-- @segment sn22.57:17.2 -->

its gratification, drawback, and escape—and due to disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding consciousness, are freed by not grasping: they are well freed.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:17.3 -->

Those who are well freed are consummate ones.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:17.4 -->

For consummate ones, there is no cycle of rebirths to be found.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:17.5 -->

That’s how a mendicant is skilled in seven cases.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:18.1 -->

And how does a mendicant examine in three ways?

<!-- @segment sn22.57:18.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant examines by way of the elements, sense fields, and dependent origination.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:18.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant examines in three ways.

<!-- @segment sn22.57:18.4 -->

In this teaching and training, a mendicant who is skilled in seven cases and who examines in three ways is called consummate, accomplished, a supreme person.”
