---
slug: sn22.117
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Shackles
---

<!-- @segment sn22.117:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn22.117:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, take an unlearned ordinary person who has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve not seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the true persons.

<!-- @segment sn22.117:1.3 -->

They regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form.

<!-- @segment sn22.117:1.4 -->

They’re called an unlearned ordinary person who is bound to form, inside and out. They see neither the near shore nor the far shore. They’re born in bonds and die in bonds, and in bonds they go from this world to the next.

<!-- @segment sn22.117:1.5 -->

They regard feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.117:1.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.117:1.7 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.117:1.8 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.117:1.9 -->

consciousness as self.

<!-- @segment sn22.117:1.10 -->

They’re called an unlearned ordinary person who is bound to consciousness, inside and out. They see neither the near shore nor the far shore. They’re born in bonds and die in bonds, and in bonds they go from this world to the next.

<!-- @segment sn22.117:2.1 -->

A learned noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve seen true persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true persons.

<!-- @segment sn22.117:2.2 -->

They don’t regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form.

<!-- @segment sn22.117:2.3 -->

They’re called a learned noble disciple who is not bound to form, inside or out. They see the near shore and the far shore. They’re free from suffering, I say.

<!-- @segment sn22.117:2.4 -->

They don’t regard feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.117:2.5 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.117:2.6 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.117:2.7 -->

consciousness as self.

<!-- @segment sn22.117:2.8 -->

They’re called a learned noble disciple who is not bound to consciousness, inside or out. They see the near shore and the far shore. They’re free from suffering, I say.”
