---
slug: sn22.60
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Mahāli
---

<!-- @segment sn22.60:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:1.3 -->

Then Mahāli the Licchavi went up to the Buddha … and said to him:

<!-- @segment sn22.60:2.1 -->

“Sir, Pūraṇa Kassapa says this:

<!-- @segment sn22.60:2.2 -->

‘There is no cause or reason for the corruption of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:2.3 -->

Sentient beings are corrupted without cause or reason.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:2.4 -->

There’s no cause or reason for the purification of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:2.5 -->

Sentient beings are purified without cause or reason.’

<!-- @segment sn22.60:2.6 -->

What does the Buddha say about this?”

<!-- @segment sn22.60:3.1 -->

“Mahāli, there is a cause and reason for the corruption of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:3.2 -->

Sentient beings are corrupted with cause and reason.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:3.3 -->

There is a cause and reason for the purification of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:3.4 -->

Sentient beings are purified with cause and reason.”

<!-- @segment sn22.60:4.1 -->

“But sir, what is the cause and reason for the corruption of sentient beings?

<!-- @segment sn22.60:4.2 -->

How are sentient beings corrupted with cause and reason?”

<!-- @segment sn22.60:5.1 -->

“Mahāli, if form were exclusively painful—soaked and steeped in pain and not steeped in pleasure—sentient beings wouldn’t be aroused by it.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:5.2 -->

But because form is pleasurable—soaked and steeped in pleasure and not steeped in pain—sentient beings are aroused by it.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:5.3 -->

Since they are aroused by it, they’re caught up in it, and so they become corrupted.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:5.4 -->

This is a cause and reason for the corruption of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:5.5 -->

This is how sentient beings are corrupted with cause and reason.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:6.1 -->

If feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.60:6.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.60:6.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.60:6.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.60:6.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.60:6.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.60:7.1 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.60:7.2 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.60:7.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.60:7.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.60:7.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.60:7.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.60:7.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.60:8.1 -->

consciousness were exclusively painful—soaked and steeped in pain and not steeped in pleasure—sentient beings wouldn’t be aroused by it.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:8.2 -->

But because consciousness is pleasurable—soaked and steeped in pleasure and not steeped in pain—sentient beings are aroused by it.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:8.3 -->

Since they are aroused by it, they’re caught up in it, and so they become corrupted.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:8.4 -->

This is a cause and reason for the corruption of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:8.5 -->

This is how sentient beings are corrupted with cause and reason.”

<!-- @segment sn22.60:9.1 -->

“But sir, what is the cause and reason for the purification of sentient beings?

<!-- @segment sn22.60:9.2 -->

How are sentient beings purified with cause and reason?”

<!-- @segment sn22.60:9.3 -->

“Mahāli, if form was perfectly pleasurable—soaked and steeped in pleasure and not steeped in pain—sentient beings wouldn’t grow disillusioned with it.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:9.4 -->

But because form is painful—soaked and steeped in pain and not steeped in pleasure—sentient beings do grow disillusioned with it.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:9.5 -->

Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they are purified.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:9.6 -->

This is a cause and reason for the purification of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:9.7 -->

This is how sentient beings are purified with cause and reason.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:10.1 -->

If feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.60:10.2 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.60:10.3 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.60:10.4 -->

consciousness was perfectly pleasurable—soaked and steeped in pleasure and not steeped in pain—sentient beings wouldn’t grow disillusioned with it.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:10.5 -->

But because consciousness is painful—soaked and steeped in pain and not steeped in pleasure—sentient beings do grow disillusioned with it.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:10.6 -->

Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they are purified.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:10.7 -->

This is a cause and reason for the purification of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment sn22.60:10.8 -->

This is how sentient beings are purified with cause and reason.”
