---
slug: sn22.44
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Practice
---

<!-- @segment sn22.44:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn22.44:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, I will teach you the practice that leads to the origin of substantial reality and the practice that leads to the cessation of substantial reality.

<!-- @segment sn22.44:1.3 -->

Listen …

<!-- @segment sn22.44:1.4 -->

And what is the practice that leads to the origin of substantial reality?

<!-- @segment sn22.44:1.5 -->

It’s when an unlearned ordinary person has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve not seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the true persons.

<!-- @segment sn22.44:1.6 -->

They regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form.

<!-- @segment sn22.44:1.7 -->

They regard feeling as self …

<!-- @segment sn22.44:1.8 -->

They regard perception as self …

<!-- @segment sn22.44:1.9 -->

They regard choices as self …

<!-- @segment sn22.44:1.10 -->

They regard consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.44:1.11 -->

This is called the practice that leads to the origin of substantial reality.

<!-- @segment sn22.44:1.12 -->

And that’s why it’s called a way of regarding things that leads to the origin of suffering.

<!-- @segment sn22.44:1.13 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.44:2.1 -->

And what is the practice that leads to the cessation of substantial reality?

<!-- @segment sn22.44:2.2 -->

It’s when a learned noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve seen true persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true persons.

<!-- @segment sn22.44:2.3 -->

They don’t regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form.

<!-- @segment sn22.44:2.4 -->

They don’t regard feeling as self …

<!-- @segment sn22.44:2.5 -->

They don’t regard perception as self …

<!-- @segment sn22.44:2.6 -->

They don’t regard choices as self …

<!-- @segment sn22.44:2.7 -->

They don’t regard consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.44:2.8 -->

This is called the practice that leads to the cessation of substantial reality.

<!-- @segment sn22.44:2.9 -->

And that’s why it’s called a way of regarding things that leads to the cessation of suffering.”

<!-- @segment sn22.44:2.10 -->
