---
slug: sn22.53
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Involvement
---

<!-- @segment sn22.53:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn22.53:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, if you get involved, you’re not free. If you’re not involved, you’re free.

<!-- @segment sn22.53:1.3 -->

As long as consciousness continues, it would get involved with form, supported by form, established on form. And with a sprinkle of relishing, it would grow, increase, and mature.

<!-- @segment sn22.53:1.4 -->

Or consciousness would get involved with feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.53:1.5 -->

Or consciousness would get involved with perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.53:1.6 -->

Or as long as consciousness continues, it would get involved with choices, supported by choices, established on choices. And with a sprinkle of relishing, it would grow, increase, and mature.

<!-- @segment sn22.53:2.1 -->

Mendicants, suppose you say:

<!-- @segment sn22.53:2.2 -->

‘Apart from form, feeling, perception, and choices, I will describe the coming and going of consciousness, its passing away and reappearing, its growth, increase, and maturity.’ That is not possible.

<!-- @segment sn22.53:3.1 -->

If a mendicant has given up greed for the form element,

<!-- @segment sn22.53:3.2 -->

the support is cut off, and there is no establishment of consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.53:3.3 -->

If a mendicant has given up greed for the feeling element …

<!-- @segment sn22.53:3.4 -->

perception element …

<!-- @segment sn22.53:3.5 -->

choices element …

<!-- @segment sn22.53:3.6 -->

consciousness element,

<!-- @segment sn22.53:3.7 -->

the support is cut off, and there is no establishment of consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.53:3.8 -->

Since that consciousness does not become established and does not grow, not making choices, it is freed.

<!-- @segment sn22.53:3.9 -->

Being free, it’s stable. Being stable, it’s content. Being content, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished.

<!-- @segment sn22.53:3.10 -->

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’”
