---
slug: sn22.26
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Gratification
---

<!-- @segment sn22.26:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn22.26:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, before my awakening—when I was still unawakened but intent on awakening—I thought:

<!-- @segment sn22.26:1.3 -->

‘What’s the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to form …

<!-- @segment sn22.26:1.4 -->

feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.26:1.5 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.26:1.6 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.26:1.7 -->

and consciousness?’

<!-- @segment sn22.26:1.8 -->

Then it occurred to me:

<!-- @segment sn22.26:1.9 -->

‘The pleasure and happiness that arise from form: this is its gratification.

<!-- @segment sn22.26:1.10 -->

That form is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback.

<!-- @segment sn22.26:1.11 -->

Removing and giving up desire and greed for form: this is its escape.

<!-- @segment sn22.26:1.12 -->

The pleasure and happiness that arise from feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.26:1.13 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.26:1.14 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.26:1.15 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.26:1.16 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.26:1.17 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.26:1.18 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.26:1.19 -->

consciousness: this is its gratification.

<!-- @segment sn22.26:1.20 -->

That consciousness is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback.

<!-- @segment sn22.26:1.21 -->

Removing and giving up desire and greed for consciousness: this is its escape.’

<!-- @segment sn22.26:2.1 -->

As long as I didn’t truly understand these five grasping aggregates’ gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for what they are, I didn’t announce my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

<!-- @segment sn22.26:2.2 -->

But when I did truly understand these five grasping aggregates’ gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for what they are, I announced my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

<!-- @segment sn22.26:2.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.26:2.4 -->

Knowledge and vision arose in me:

<!-- @segment sn22.26:2.5 -->

‘My freedom is unshakable; this is my last rebirth; now there’ll be no more future lives.’”
