---
slug: sn22.82
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: A Full Moon Night
---

<!-- @segment sn22.82:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother in the Eastern Monastery, together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants.

<!-- @segment sn22.82:1.2 -->

Now, at that time it was the sabbath—the full moon on the fifteenth day—and the Buddha was sitting in the open surrounded by the Saṅgha of monks.

<!-- @segment sn22.82:2.1 -->

Then one of the mendicants rose from their seat, arranged their robe over one shoulder, raised their cupped palms toward the Buddha, and said:

<!-- @segment sn22.82:2.2 -->

“Sir, I’d like to ask the Buddha about a certain point, if you’d take the time to answer.”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:2.3 -->

“Well then, mendicant, take your own seat and ask what you wish.”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:2.4 -->

“Yes, sir,” replied that mendicant. He took his seat and said to the Buddha:

<!-- @segment sn22.82:2.5 -->

“Sir, are these the five grasping aggregates, that is:

<!-- @segment sn22.82:2.6 -->

form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness?”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:3.1 -->

“Yes, they are,” replied the Buddha.

<!-- @segment sn22.82:3.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.82:3.3 -->

Saying “Good, sir”, that mendicant approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. Then he asked another question:

<!-- @segment sn22.82:4.1 -->

“But sir, what is the root of these five grasping aggregates?”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:4.2 -->

“These five grasping aggregates are rooted in desire.” …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:4.3 -->

“But sir, is that grasping the exact same thing as the five grasping aggregates? Or is grasping one thing and the five grasping aggregates another?”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:4.4 -->

“Neither. Rather, the desire and greed for them is the grasping there.”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:4.5 -->

Saying “Good, sir”, that mendicant asked another question:

<!-- @segment sn22.82:5.1 -->

“But sir, can there be different kinds of desire and greed for the five grasping aggregates?”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:5.2 -->

“There can,” said the Buddha.

<!-- @segment sn22.82:5.3 -->

“It’s when someone thinks:

<!-- @segment sn22.82:5.4 -->

‘In the future, may I be of such form, such feeling, such perception, such choices, or such consciousness!’

<!-- @segment sn22.82:5.5 -->

That’s how there can be different kinds of desire and greed for the five grasping aggregates.”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:5.6 -->

Saying “Good, sir”, that mendicant asked another question:

<!-- @segment sn22.82:6.1 -->

“Sir, what is the scope of the term ‘aggregates’ as applied to the aggregates?”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:6.2 -->

“Any kind of form at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: this is called the aggregate of form.

<!-- @segment sn22.82:6.3 -->

Any kind of feeling at all …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:6.4 -->

Any kind of perception at all …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:6.5 -->

Any kind of choices at all …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:6.6 -->

Any kind of consciousness at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: this is called the aggregate of consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.82:6.7 -->

That’s the scope of the term ‘aggregates’ as applied to the aggregates.”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:6.8 -->

Saying “Good, sir”, that mendicant asked another question:

<!-- @segment sn22.82:7.1 -->

“What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why the aggregate of form is found?

<!-- @segment sn22.82:7.2 -->

What is the cause, what is the reason why the aggregate of feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:7.3 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:7.4 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:7.5 -->

consciousness is found?”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:7.6 -->

“The four principal states are the reason why the aggregate of form is found.

<!-- @segment sn22.82:7.7 -->

Contact is the reason why the aggregates of feeling,

<!-- @segment sn22.82:7.8 -->

perception,

<!-- @segment sn22.82:7.9 -->

and choices are found.

<!-- @segment sn22.82:7.10 -->

Name and form are the reasons why the aggregate of consciousness is found.”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:7.11 -->

Saying “Good, sir”, that mendicant asked another question:

<!-- @segment sn22.82:8.1 -->

“Sir, how does substantialist view come about?”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:8.2 -->

“It’s when an unlearned ordinary person has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve not seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the true persons.

<!-- @segment sn22.82:8.3 -->

They regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form.

<!-- @segment sn22.82:8.4 -->

They regard feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:8.5 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:8.6 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:8.7 -->

consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.82:8.8 -->

That’s how substantialist view comes about.”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:8.9 -->

Saying “Good, sir”, that mendicant … asked another question:

<!-- @segment sn22.82:9.1 -->

“But sir, how does substantialist view not come about?”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:9.2 -->

“It’s when a learned noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve seen true persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true persons.

<!-- @segment sn22.82:9.3 -->

They don’t regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form.

<!-- @segment sn22.82:9.4 -->

They don’t regard feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:9.5 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:9.6 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:9.7 -->

consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.82:9.8 -->

That’s how substantialist view does not come about.”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:9.9 -->

Saying “Good, sir”, that mendicant … asked another question:

<!-- @segment sn22.82:10.1 -->

“Sir, what’s the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to form,

<!-- @segment sn22.82:10.2 -->

feeling,

<!-- @segment sn22.82:10.3 -->

perception,

<!-- @segment sn22.82:10.4 -->

choices,

<!-- @segment sn22.82:10.5 -->

and consciousness?”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:10.6 -->

“The pleasure and happiness that arise from form: this is its gratification.

<!-- @segment sn22.82:10.7 -->

That form is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback.

<!-- @segment sn22.82:10.8 -->

Removing and giving up desire and greed for form: this is its escape.

<!-- @segment sn22.82:10.9 -->

The pleasure and happiness that arise from feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:10.10 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:10.11 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:10.12 -->

consciousness: this is its gratification.

<!-- @segment sn22.82:10.13 -->

That consciousness is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback.

<!-- @segment sn22.82:10.14 -->

Removing and giving up desire and greed for consciousness: this is its escape.”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:10.15 -->

Saying “Good, sir”, that mendicant approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. Then he asked another question:

<!-- @segment sn22.82:11.1 -->

“Sir, how does one know and see so that there’s no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body and externally for all signs?”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:11.2 -->

“One truly sees any kind of form at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: <em>all</em> form—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

<!-- @segment sn22.82:11.3 -->

They truly see any kind of feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:11.4 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:11.5 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:11.6 -->

consciousness at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near, <em>all</em> consciousness—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

<!-- @segment sn22.82:11.7 -->

That’s how to know and see so that there’s no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body and externally for all signs.”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:12.1 -->

Now at that time one of the mendicants had the thought:

<!-- @segment sn22.82:12.2 -->

“So it seems, worthy sir, that form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness are not-self.

<!-- @segment sn22.82:12.3 -->

Then how will the deeds done by not-self affect the self?”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:12.4 -->

Then the Buddha, knowing that monk’s train of thought, addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment sn22.82:13.1 -->

“It’s possible that some futile person here—unknowing and ignorant, their mind dominated by craving—thinks they can overstep the teacher’s instructions. They think:

<!-- @segment sn22.82:13.2 -->

‘So it seems, worthy sir, that form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness are not-self.

<!-- @segment sn22.82:13.3 -->

Then how will the deeds done by not-self affect the self?’

<!-- @segment sn22.82:13.4 -->

Now, mendicants, you have been educated by me in questioning with regards to all these things in all such cases.

<!-- @segment sn22.82:14.1 -->

What do you think, mendicants?

<!-- @segment sn22.82:14.2 -->

Is form permanent or impermanent?”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:14.3 -->

“Impermanent, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:14.4 -->

“Is feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:14.5 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:14.6 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:14.7 -->

consciousness permanent or impermanent?”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:14.8 -->

“Impermanent, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:14.9 -->

“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:14.10 -->

“Suffering, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:14.11 -->

“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be regarded thus:

<!-- @segment sn22.82:14.12 -->

‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:14.13 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:14.14 -->

“So you should truly see …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:14.15 -->

Seeing this …

<!-- @segment sn22.82:14.16 -->

They understand: ‘… there is nothing further for this place.’”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:15.1 -->

“Two on the aggregates; exactly the same; <j>and can there be;

<!-- @segment sn22.82:15.2 -->

on the term; and on the cause;

<!-- @segment sn22.82:15.3 -->

two questions on substantial reality;

<!-- @segment sn22.82:15.4 -->

gratification; and that with consciousness:

<!-- @segment sn22.82:15.5 -->

these are the ten questions

<!-- @segment sn22.82:15.6 -->

the mendicant came to ask.”

<!-- @segment sn22.82:15.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.82:15.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.82:16.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.82:16.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.82:16.3 -->
