---
slug: sn22.54
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Seeds of Plants
---

<!-- @segment sn22.54:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn22.54:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, there are five kinds of plants.

<!-- @segment sn22.54:1.3 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment sn22.54:1.4 -->

Plants propagated from roots, trunks, cuttings, or joints; and those from regular seeds are the fifth.

<!-- @segment sn22.54:1.5 -->

Suppose these five kinds of plants were intact, unspoiled, not weather-damaged, fertile, and well-kept. But there’s no earth or water.

<!-- @segment sn22.54:1.6 -->

Then would these five kinds of plants reach growth, increase, and maturity?”

<!-- @segment sn22.54:1.7 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn22.54:1.8 -->

“Suppose these five kinds of plants were intact, unspoiled, not weather-damaged, fertile, and well-kept. And there is earth and water.

<!-- @segment sn22.54:1.9 -->

Then would these five kinds of plants reach growth, increase, and maturity?”

<!-- @segment sn22.54:1.10 -->

“Yes, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn22.54:1.11 -->

“The four grounds for consciousness should be seen as like the earth element.

<!-- @segment sn22.54:1.12 -->

Relishing and greed should be seen as like the water element.

<!-- @segment sn22.54:1.13 -->

Consciousness with its fuel should be seen as like the five kinds of plants.

<!-- @segment sn22.54:2.1 -->

As long as consciousness continues, it would get involved with form, supported by form, established on form. And with a sprinkle of relishing, it would grow, increase, and mature.

<!-- @segment sn22.54:2.2 -->

Or consciousness would get involved with feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.54:2.3 -->

Or consciousness would get involved with perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.54:2.4 -->

Or as long as consciousness continues, it would get involved with choices, supported by choices, established on choices. And with a sprinkle of relishing, it would grow, increase, and mature.

<!-- @segment sn22.54:3.1 -->

Mendicants, suppose you say:

<!-- @segment sn22.54:3.2 -->

‘Apart from form, feeling, perception, and choices, I will describe the coming and going of consciousness, its passing away and reappearing, its growth, increase, and maturity.’ That is not possible.

<!-- @segment sn22.54:4.1 -->

If a mendicant has given up greed for the form element,

<!-- @segment sn22.54:4.2 -->

the support is cut off, and there is no establishment of consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.54:4.3 -->

If a mendicant has given up greed for the feeling element …

<!-- @segment sn22.54:4.4 -->

perception element …

<!-- @segment sn22.54:4.5 -->

choices element …

<!-- @segment sn22.54:4.6 -->

consciousness element,

<!-- @segment sn22.54:4.7 -->

the support is cut off, and there is no establishment of consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.54:4.8 -->

Since that consciousness does not become established and does not grow, not making choices, it is freed.

<!-- @segment sn22.54:4.9 -->

Being free, it’s stable. Being stable, it’s content. Being content, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished.

<!-- @segment sn22.54:4.10 -->

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended … there is nothing further for this place.’”
