---
slug: sn22.22
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Burden of Responsibility
---

<!-- @segment sn22.22:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn22.22:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, I will teach you the burden, the bearer of the burden, the taking up of the burden, and the putting down of the burden.

<!-- @segment sn22.22:1.3 -->

Listen …

<!-- @segment sn22.22:1.4 -->

And what is the burden?

<!-- @segment sn22.22:1.5 -->

The five grasping aggregates, it should be said.

<!-- @segment sn22.22:1.6 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment sn22.22:1.7 -->

The grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.22:1.8 -->

This is called the burden.

<!-- @segment sn22.22:2.1 -->

And who is the bearer of the burden?

<!-- @segment sn22.22:2.2 -->

The individual, it should be said;

<!-- @segment sn22.22:2.3 -->

the venerable of such and such name and clan.

<!-- @segment sn22.22:2.4 -->

This is called the bearer of the burden.

<!-- @segment sn22.22:3.1 -->

And what is the taking up of the burden?

<!-- @segment sn22.22:3.2 -->

It’s the craving that leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure there wherever it alights. That is,

<!-- @segment sn22.22:3.3 -->

craving for sensual pleasures, craving for existence, and craving for nonexistence.

<!-- @segment sn22.22:3.4 -->

This is called the taking up of the burden.

<!-- @segment sn22.22:4.1 -->

And what is the putting down of the burden?

<!-- @segment sn22.22:4.2 -->

It’s the fading away and cessation of that very same craving no residue left behind; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not clinging to it.

<!-- @segment sn22.22:4.3 -->

This is called the putting down of the burden.”

<!-- @segment sn22.22:5.1 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment sn22.22:5.2 -->

Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

<!-- @segment sn22.22:6.1 -->

“The five aggregates are indeed burdens,

<!-- @segment sn22.22:6.2 -->

and the individual is the bearer of the burden.

<!-- @segment sn22.22:6.3 -->

Taking up the burden is suffering in the world,

<!-- @segment sn22.22:6.4 -->

and putting the burden down is happiness.

<!-- @segment sn22.22:7.1 -->

When the heavy burden is put down

<!-- @segment sn22.22:7.2 -->

without taking up another,

<!-- @segment sn22.22:7.3 -->

one who has plucked out craving, root and all,

<!-- @segment sn22.22:7.4 -->

is hungerless, quenched.”
