---
slug: sn22.27
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Gratification (2nd)
---

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, I went in search of form’s gratification,

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.3 -->

and I found it.

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.4 -->

I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of form’s gratification.

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.5 -->

I went in search of form’s drawback,

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.6 -->

and I found it.

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.7 -->

I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of form’s drawback.

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.8 -->

I went in search of form’s escape,

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.9 -->

and I found it.

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.10 -->

I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of form’s escape.

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.11 -->

I went in search of the gratification of feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.12 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.13 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.14 -->

and consciousness,

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.15 -->

and I found it.

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.16 -->

I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of consciousness’s gratification.

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.17 -->

I went in search of consciousness’s drawback,

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.18 -->

and I found it.

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.19 -->

I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of consciousness’s drawback.

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.20 -->

I went in search of consciousness’s escape,

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.21 -->

and I found it.

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.22 -->

I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of consciousness’s escape.

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.23 -->

As long as I didn’t truly understand these five grasping aggregates’ gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, I didn’t announce my supreme perfect awakening …

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.24 -->

But when I did truly understand these five grasping aggregates’ gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, I announced my supreme perfect awakening …

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.25 -->

Knowledge and vision arose in me:

<!-- @segment sn22.27:1.26 -->

‘My freedom is unshakable; this is my last rebirth; now there’ll be no more future lives.’”
