---
slug: sn22.59
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Characteristic of Not-Self
---

<!-- @segment sn22.59:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Varanasi, in the deer park at Isipatana.

<!-- @segment sn22.59:1.2 -->

There the Buddha addressed the group of five mendicants:

<!-- @segment sn22.59:1.3 -->

“Mendicants!”

<!-- @segment sn22.59:1.4 -->

“Venerable sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment sn22.59:1.5 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment sn22.59:2.1 -->

“Mendicants, form is not-self.

<!-- @segment sn22.59:2.2 -->

For if form were self, it wouldn’t lead to affliction. And you could compel form:

<!-- @segment sn22.59:2.3 -->

‘May my form be like this! May it not be like that!’

<!-- @segment sn22.59:2.4 -->

But because form is not-self, it leads to affliction. And you can’t compel form:

<!-- @segment sn22.59:2.5 -->

‘May my form be like this! May it not be like that!’

<!-- @segment sn22.59:3.1 -->

Feeling is not-self …

<!-- @segment sn22.59:3.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.59:3.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.59:3.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.59:3.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.59:4.1 -->

Perception is not-self …

<!-- @segment sn22.59:4.2 -->

Choices are not-self …

<!-- @segment sn22.59:4.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.59:4.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.59:4.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.59:4.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.59:5.1 -->

Consciousness is not-self.

<!-- @segment sn22.59:5.2 -->

For if consciousness were self, it wouldn’t lead to affliction. And you could compel consciousness:

<!-- @segment sn22.59:5.3 -->

‘May my consciousness be like this! May it not be like that!’

<!-- @segment sn22.59:5.4 -->

But because consciousness is not-self, it leads to affliction. And you can’t compel consciousness:

<!-- @segment sn22.59:5.5 -->

‘May my consciousness be like this! May it not be like that!’

<!-- @segment sn22.59:6.1 -->

What do you think, mendicants?

<!-- @segment sn22.59:6.2 -->

Is form permanent or impermanent?”

<!-- @segment sn22.59:6.3 -->

“Impermanent, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn22.59:6.4 -->

“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?”

<!-- @segment sn22.59:6.5 -->

“Suffering, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn22.59:6.6 -->

“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be regarded thus:

<!-- @segment sn22.59:6.7 -->

‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”

<!-- @segment sn22.59:6.8 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn22.59:6.9 -->

“Is feeling permanent or impermanent?” …

<!-- @segment sn22.59:6.10 -->

“Is perception permanent or impermanent?” …

<!-- @segment sn22.59:6.11 -->

“Are choices permanent or impermanent?” …

<!-- @segment sn22.59:6.12 -->

“Is consciousness permanent or impermanent?”

<!-- @segment sn22.59:6.13 -->

“Impermanent, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn22.59:6.14 -->

“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?”

<!-- @segment sn22.59:6.15 -->

“Suffering, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn22.59:6.16 -->

“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be regarded thus:

<!-- @segment sn22.59:6.17 -->

‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”

<!-- @segment sn22.59:6.18 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn22.59:7.1 -->

“So you should truly see any kind of form at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: <em>all</em> form—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

<!-- @segment sn22.59:8.1 -->

Any kind of feeling at all …

<!-- @segment sn22.59:9.1 -->

Any kind of perception at all …

<!-- @segment sn22.59:9.2 -->

Any kind of choices at all …

<!-- @segment sn22.59:10.1 -->

You should truly see any kind of consciousness at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: <em>all</em> consciousness—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

<!-- @segment sn22.59:11.1 -->

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.59:11.2 -->

Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed.

<!-- @segment sn22.59:11.3 -->

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’”

<!-- @segment sn22.59:12.1 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment sn22.59:12.2 -->

Satisfied, the group of five mendicants approved what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment sn22.59:12.3 -->

And while this discourse was being spoken, the minds of the group of five mendicants were freed from defilements by not grasping.
