---
slug: sn22.96
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: A Lump of Cow Dung
---

<!-- @segment sn22.96:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:1.2 -->

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

<!-- @segment sn22.96:1.3 -->

“Sir, is there any form at all that’s permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, and will last forever and ever?

<!-- @segment sn22.96:1.4 -->

Is there any feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.96:1.5 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.96:1.6 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.96:1.7 -->

consciousness at all that’s permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, and will last forever and ever?”

<!-- @segment sn22.96:1.8 -->

“Mendicant, there is no form at all that’s permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, and will last forever and ever.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:1.9 -->

There’s no feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.96:1.10 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.96:1.11 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.96:1.12 -->

consciousness at all that’s permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, and will last forever and ever.”

<!-- @segment sn22.96:2.1 -->

Then the Buddha, picking up a lump of cow dung, said to the mendicants:

<!-- @segment sn22.96:2.2 -->

“There’s not even this much of any incarnation that’s permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, and will last forever and ever.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:2.3 -->

If there were, this living of the spiritual life for the complete ending of suffering would not be found.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:2.4 -->

But since there isn’t, this living of the spiritual life for the complete ending of suffering is found.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:3.1 -->

Once upon a time I was an anointed aristocratic king.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:3.2 -->

I had 84,000 cities, with the capital Kusāvatī the foremost.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:3.3 -->

I had 84,000 palaces, with the Palace of Principle the foremost.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:3.4 -->

I had 84,000 chambers, with the Chamber of the Grand Tower the foremost.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:3.5 -->

I had 84,000 couches made of ivory or heartwood or gold or silver, spread with woolen covers—shag-piled or embroidered with flowers—and spread with a fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red pillows at both ends.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:3.6 -->

I had 84,000 bull elephants with gold adornments and banners, covered with snow gold netting, with the royal bull elephant named Sabbath the foremost.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:3.7 -->

I had 84,000 horses with gold adornments and banners, covered with snow gold netting, with the royal steed named Thundercloud the foremost.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:3.8 -->

I had 84,000 chariots with gold adornments and banners, covered with snow gold netting, with the chariot named Triumph the foremost.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:3.9 -->

I had 84,000 jewels, with the jewel-treasure the foremost.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:3.10 -->

I had 84,000 women, with Queen Subhaddā the foremost.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:3.11 -->

I had 84,000 aristocrat vassals, with the commander-treasure the foremost.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:3.12 -->

I had 84,000 milk cows with muslin halter and bronze pails.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:3.13 -->

I had 8,400,000,000 delicate cloths of linen, cotton, silk, and wool.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:3.14 -->

I had 84,000 servings of food, which were presented to me as offerings at daybreak and dusk.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:4.1 -->

Of those 84,000 cities, I only stayed in one, the capital Kusāvatī.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:4.2 -->

Of those 84,000 palaces, I only dwelt in one, the Palace of Principle.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:4.3 -->

Of those 84,000 chambers, I only dwelt in one, the Chamber of the Grand Tower.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:4.4 -->

Of those 84,000 couches, I only used one, made of ivory or heartwood or gold or silver.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:4.5 -->

Of those 84,000 bull elephants, I only rode one, the royal bull elephant named Sabbath.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:4.6 -->

Of those 84,000 horses, I only rode one, the royal horse named Thundercloud.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:4.7 -->

Of those 84,000 chariots, I only rode one, the chariot named Triumph.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:4.8 -->

Of those 84,000 women, I was only served by one, an aristocrat maiden or a coquette.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:4.9 -->

Of those 8,400,000,000 cloths, I only wore one pair, made of delicate linen, cotton, silk, and wool.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:4.10 -->

Of those 84,000 servings of food, I only had one, eating at most a cup of rice with suitable sauce.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:4.11 -->

And so all those conditioned phenomena have passed, ceased, and perished.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:4.12 -->

So impermanent are conditions,

<!-- @segment sn22.96:4.13 -->

so unstable are conditions,

<!-- @segment sn22.96:4.14 -->

so unreliable are conditions.

<!-- @segment sn22.96:4.15 -->

This is quite enough for you to become disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding all conditions.”
