---
slug: sn22.126
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Liable to Originate
---

<!-- @segment sn22.126:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn22.126:1.2 -->

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

<!-- @segment sn22.126:1.3 -->

“Sir, they speak of this thing called ‘ignorance’.

<!-- @segment sn22.126:1.4 -->

What is ignorance?

<!-- @segment sn22.126:1.5 -->

And how is an ignoramus defined?”

<!-- @segment sn22.126:2.1 -->

“Mendicant, it’s when an unlearned ordinary person doesn’t truly understand form, which is liable to originate, as form which is liable to originate.

<!-- @segment sn22.126:2.2 -->

They don’t truly understand form, which is liable to vanish, as form which is liable to vanish.

<!-- @segment sn22.126:2.3 -->

They don’t truly understand form, which is liable to originate and vanish, as form which is liable to originate and vanish.

<!-- @segment sn22.126:2.4 -->

They don’t truly understand feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.126:2.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.126:2.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.126:2.7 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.126:2.8 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.126:2.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.126:2.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.126:2.11 -->

consciousness, which is liable to originate, as consciousness which is liable to originate.

<!-- @segment sn22.126:2.12 -->

They don’t truly understand consciousness, which is liable to vanish, as consciousness which is liable to vanish.

<!-- @segment sn22.126:2.13 -->

They don’t truly understand consciousness, which is liable to originate and vanish, as consciousness which is liable to originate and vanish.

<!-- @segment sn22.126:2.14 -->

This is called ignorance.

<!-- @segment sn22.126:2.15 -->

And this is how an ignoramus is defined.”

<!-- @segment sn22.126:3.1 -->

When he said this, the mendicant said to the Buddha:

<!-- @segment sn22.126:3.2 -->

“Sir, they speak of this thing called ‘knowledge’.

<!-- @segment sn22.126:3.3 -->

What is knowledge?

<!-- @segment sn22.126:3.4 -->

And how is a knowing one defined?”

<!-- @segment sn22.126:4.1 -->

“Mendicant, it’s when a learned noble disciple truly understands form, which is liable to originate, as form which is liable to originate.

<!-- @segment sn22.126:4.2 -->

They truly understand form, which is liable to vanish, as form which is liable to vanish.

<!-- @segment sn22.126:4.3 -->

They truly understand form, which is liable to originate and vanish, as form which is liable to originate and vanish.

<!-- @segment sn22.126:4.4 -->

They truly understand feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.126:4.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.126:4.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.126:4.7 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.126:4.8 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.126:4.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.126:4.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.126:4.11 -->

consciousness, which is liable to originate, as consciousness which is liable to originate.

<!-- @segment sn22.126:4.12 -->

They truly understand consciousness, which is liable to vanish, as consciousness which is liable to vanish.

<!-- @segment sn22.126:4.13 -->

They truly understand consciousness, which is liable to originate and vanish, as consciousness which is liable to originate and vanish.

<!-- @segment sn22.126:4.14 -->

This is called knowledge.

<!-- @segment sn22.126:4.15 -->

And this is how a knowing one is defined.”
