---
slug: sn22.93
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: A River
---

<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.2 -->

“Suppose, mendicants, there was a mountain river that flowed swiftly, going far, carrying all before it. If wild sugarcane, kusa grass, reeds, vetiver, or trees grew on either bank, they’d overhang the river. And if a person who was being swept along by the current grabbed the wild sugarcane, kusa grass, reeds, vetiver, or trees, it’d fall apart, and they’d come to ruin because of that.

<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.3 -->

In the same way, an unlearned ordinary person has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve not seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the true persons.

<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.4 -->

They regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form.

<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.5 -->

But their form falls apart,

<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.6 -->

and they come to ruin because of that.

<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.7 -->

They regard feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.8 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.9 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.10 -->

consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.11 -->

But their consciousness falls apart,

<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.12 -->

and they come to ruin because of that.

<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.13 -->

What do you think, mendicants?

<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.14 -->

Is form permanent or impermanent?”

<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.15 -->

“Impermanent, sir.” …

<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.16 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.17 -->

“Is feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.18 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.19 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.20 -->

consciousness permanent or impermanent?”

<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.21 -->

“Impermanent, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.22 -->

“So you should truly see …

<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.23 -->

Seeing this …

<!-- @segment sn22.93:1.24 -->

They understand: ‘… there is nothing further for this place.’”
