---
slug: sn22.80
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Beggars
---

<!-- @segment sn22.80:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:1.2 -->

Then the Buddha, having dismissed the mendicant Saṅgha for some reason, robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Kapilavatthu for alms.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:1.3 -->

He wandered for alms in Kapilavatthu. After the meal, on his return from almsround, he went to the Great Wood for the day’s meditation,

<!-- @segment sn22.80:1.4 -->

plunged deep into it, and sat at the root of a young wood-apple tree to meditate.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:2.1 -->

Then as he was in private retreat this thought came to his mind,

<!-- @segment sn22.80:2.2 -->

“I have purged the mendicant Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:2.3 -->

But there are mendicants here who are junior, recently gone forth, newly come to this teaching and training.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:2.4 -->

Not seeing me they may change and fall apart.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:2.5 -->

If a young calf doesn’t see its mother it may change and fall apart. …

<!-- @segment sn22.80:2.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.80:2.7 -->

Or if young seedlings don’t get water they may change and fall apart.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:2.8 -->

In the same way, there are mendicants here who are junior, recently gone forth, newly come to this teaching and training.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:2.9 -->

Not seeing me they may change and fall apart.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:2.10 -->

Why don’t I support the mendicant Saṅgha now as I did in the past?”

<!-- @segment sn22.80:3.1 -->

Then the divinity Sahampati knew the Buddha’s train of thought. As easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from the realm of divinity and reappeared in front of the Buddha.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:3.2 -->

He arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his cupped palms toward the Buddha, and said:

<!-- @segment sn22.80:3.3 -->

“That’s so true, Blessed One! That’s so true, Holy One!

<!-- @segment sn22.80:3.4 -->

The Buddha has purged the mendicant Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:3.5 -->

But there are mendicants who are junior, recently gone forth, newly come to this teaching and training. …

<!-- @segment sn22.80:3.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.80:3.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.80:3.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.80:3.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.80:3.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.80:3.11 -->

May the Buddha be happy with the mendicant Saṅgha!

<!-- @segment sn22.80:3.12 -->

May the Buddha welcome the mendicant Saṅgha!

<!-- @segment sn22.80:3.13 -->

May the Buddha support the mendicant Saṅgha now as he did in the past!”

<!-- @segment sn22.80:4.1 -->

The Buddha consented with silence.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:4.2 -->

Then the divinity Sahampati, knowing that the Buddha had consented, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before vanishing right there.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:5.1 -->

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to the Banyan Tree Monastery, where he sat on the seat spread out.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:5.2 -->

Then he used his psychic power to will that the mendicants would come to him timidly, alone or in pairs.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:5.3 -->

Those mendicants approached the Buddha timidly, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to them:

<!-- @segment sn22.80:6.1 -->

“This is the last of lifestyles, mendicants, namely relying on alms.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:6.2 -->

The world curses you: ‘You beggar, walking bowl in hand!’

<!-- @segment sn22.80:6.3 -->

Yet earnest gentlemen take it up for a good reason.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:6.4 -->

Not to escape a summons by a king or a summons for a bandit, or because you were in debt or in fear, or in order to make a living.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:6.5 -->

But because they’re swamped by rebirth, old age, and death; by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They’re swamped by suffering, mired in suffering.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:6.6 -->

And they think, ‘Hopefully I can make an end to this entire mass of suffering.’

<!-- @segment sn22.80:7.1 -->

That’s how this gentleman has gone forth.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:7.2 -->

Yet they covet sensual pleasures; they’re infatuated, full of ill will and malicious intent. They are unmindful, lacking situational awareness and immersion, with straying mind and undisciplined faculties.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:7.3 -->

Suppose there was a firebrand for lighting a funeral pyre, burning at both ends, and smeared with dung in the middle. It couldn’t be used as timber either in the village or the wilderness.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:7.4 -->

I say that individual is just like this. They’ve missed out on the pleasures of the lay life, and haven’t fulfilled the goal of the ascetic life.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:8.1 -->

There are these three unskillful thoughts.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:8.2 -->

Sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:8.3 -->

And where do these three unskillful thoughts cease without remainder?

<!-- @segment sn22.80:8.4 -->

In those who meditate with their mind firmly established in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation; or who develop signless immersion.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:8.5 -->

This is quite enough motivation to develop signless immersion.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:8.6 -->

When signless immersion is developed and cultivated it is very fruitful and beneficial.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:9.1 -->

There are these two views.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:9.2 -->

Views favoring existence and views favoring nonexistence.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:9.3 -->

A learned noble disciple reflects on this:

<!-- @segment sn22.80:9.4 -->

‘Is there anything in the world that I could grasp without fault?’

<!-- @segment sn22.80:9.5 -->

They understand:

<!-- @segment sn22.80:9.6 -->

‘There’s nothing in the world that I could grasp without fault.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:9.7 -->

For in grasping I would grasp only at form, feeling,

<!-- @segment sn22.80:9.8 -->

perception,

<!-- @segment sn22.80:9.9 -->

choices, or consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:9.10 -->

That grasping of mine would be a condition for continued existence.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:9.11 -->

Continued existence is a requirement for rebirth.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:9.12 -->

Rebirth is a requirement for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be.

<!-- @segment sn22.80:9.13 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.’

<!-- @segment sn22.80:10.1 -->

What do you think, mendicants?

<!-- @segment sn22.80:10.2 -->

Is form permanent or impermanent?”

<!-- @segment sn22.80:10.3 -->

“Impermanent, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn22.80:10.4 -->

“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?”

<!-- @segment sn22.80:10.5 -->

“Suffering, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn22.80:10.6 -->

“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be regarded thus:

<!-- @segment sn22.80:10.7 -->

‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”

<!-- @segment sn22.80:10.8 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn22.80:10.9 -->

“Is feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.80:10.10 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.80:10.11 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.80:10.12 -->

consciousness permanent or impermanent?” …

<!-- @segment sn22.80:10.13 -->

“So you should truly see …

<!-- @segment sn22.80:10.14 -->

Seeing this …

<!-- @segment sn22.80:10.15 -->

They understand: ‘… there is nothing further for this place.’”
