---
slug: sn22.56
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Rounds of the Grasping Aggregates
---

<!-- @segment sn22.56:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, there are these five grasping aggregates.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:1.3 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment sn22.56:1.4 -->

The grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:1.5 -->

As long as I didn’t truly understand these five grasping aggregates in four rounds, I didn’t announce my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:1.6 -->

But when I did truly understand these five grasping aggregates in four rounds, I announced my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:1.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.56:2.1 -->

And how are there four rounds?

<!-- @segment sn22.56:2.2 -->

I directly knew form, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:2.3 -->

I directly knew feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.56:2.4 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.56:2.5 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.56:2.6 -->

consciousness, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:3.1 -->

And what is form?

<!-- @segment sn22.56:3.2 -->

The four principal states, and form derived from the four principal states.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:3.3 -->

This is called form.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:3.4 -->

Form originates from fuel.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:3.5 -->

When fuel ceases, form ceases.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:3.6 -->

The practice that leads to the cessation of form is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:

<!-- @segment sn22.56:3.7 -->

right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:4.1 -->

Whatever ascetics and brahmins have directly known form in this way—and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation—and are practicing for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding form: they are practicing well.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:4.2 -->

Those who practice well have a footing in this teaching and training.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:5.1 -->

Those ascetics and brahmins who have directly known form in this way—and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation—and due to disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding form, are freed by not grasping: they are well freed.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:5.2 -->

Those who are well freed are consummate ones.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:5.3 -->

For consummate ones, there is no cycle of rebirths to be found.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:6.1 -->

And what is feeling?

<!-- @segment sn22.56:6.2 -->

There are these six classes of feeling:

<!-- @segment sn22.56:6.3 -->

feeling born of contact through the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:6.4 -->

This is called feeling.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:6.5 -->

Feeling originates from contact.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:6.6 -->

When contact ceases, feeling ceases.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:6.7 -->

The practice that leads to the cessation of feelings is simply this noble eightfold path …

<!-- @segment sn22.56:6.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.56:7.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.56:7.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.56:8.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.56:8.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.56:9.1 -->

And what is perception?

<!-- @segment sn22.56:9.2 -->

There are these six classes of perception:

<!-- @segment sn22.56:9.3 -->

perceptions of sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:9.4 -->

This is called perception.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:9.5 -->

Perception originates from contact.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:9.6 -->

When contact ceases, perception ceases.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:9.7 -->

The practice that leads to the cessation of perceptions is simply this noble eightfold path …

<!-- @segment sn22.56:9.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.56:9.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.56:10.1 -->

And what are choices?

<!-- @segment sn22.56:10.2 -->

There are these six classes of intention:

<!-- @segment sn22.56:10.3 -->

intention regarding sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:10.4 -->

These are called choices.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:10.5 -->

Choices originate from contact.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:10.6 -->

When contact ceases, choices cease.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:10.7 -->

The practice that leads to the cessation of choices is simply this noble eightfold path …

<!-- @segment sn22.56:10.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.56:11.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.56:11.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.56:12.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.56:12.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.56:12.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.56:13.1 -->

And what is consciousness?

<!-- @segment sn22.56:13.2 -->

There are these six classes of consciousness:

<!-- @segment sn22.56:13.3 -->

eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:13.4 -->

This is called consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:13.5 -->

Consciousness originates from name and form.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:13.6 -->

When name and form cease, consciousness ceases.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:13.7 -->

The practice that leads to the cessation of consciousness is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:

<!-- @segment sn22.56:13.8 -->

right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:14.1 -->

Whatever ascetics and brahmins have directly known consciousness in this way—and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation—and are practicing for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding consciousness: they are practicing well.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:14.2 -->

Those who practice well have a footing in this teaching and training.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:15.1 -->

Those ascetics and brahmins who have directly known consciousness in this way—and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation—and due to disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding consciousness, are freed by not grasping: they are well freed.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:15.2 -->

Those who are well freed are consummate ones.

<!-- @segment sn22.56:15.3 -->

For consummate ones, there is no cycle of rebirths to be found.”
