---
slug: sn22.79
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Bitable
---

<!-- @segment sn22.79:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, whatever ascetics and brahmins recollect many kinds of past lives, all recollect the five grasping aggregates, or one of them.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:1.3 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment sn22.79:1.4 -->

‘I had such form in the past.’

<!-- @segment sn22.79:1.5 -->

Recollecting thus, it’s only form that they recollect.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:1.6 -->

‘I had such feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:1.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.79:1.8 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:1.9 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:1.10 -->

consciousness in the past.’

<!-- @segment sn22.79:1.11 -->

Recollecting thus, it’s only consciousness that they recollect.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:2.1 -->

And why do you call it form?

<!-- @segment sn22.79:2.2 -->

It’s deformed; that’s why it’s called ‘form’.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:2.3 -->

Deformed by what?

<!-- @segment sn22.79:2.4 -->

Deformed by cold, heat, hunger, and thirst, and deformed by the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:2.5 -->

It’s deformed; that’s why it’s called ‘form’.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:3.1 -->

And why do you call it feeling?

<!-- @segment sn22.79:3.2 -->

It feels; that’s why it’s called ‘feeling’.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:3.3 -->

And what does it feel?

<!-- @segment sn22.79:3.4 -->

It feels pleasure, pain, and neutral.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:3.5 -->

It feels; that’s why it’s called ‘feeling’.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:4.1 -->

And why do you call it perception?

<!-- @segment sn22.79:4.2 -->

It perceives; that’s why it’s called ‘perception’.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:4.3 -->

And what does it perceive?

<!-- @segment sn22.79:4.4 -->

It perceives blue, yellow, red, and white.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:4.5 -->

It perceives; that’s why it’s called ‘perception’.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:5.1 -->

And why do you call them choices?

<!-- @segment sn22.79:5.2 -->

Choices produce conditioned phenomena; that’s why they’re called ‘choices’.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:5.3 -->

And what are the conditioned phenomena that they produce?

<!-- @segment sn22.79:5.4 -->

Form is a conditioned phenomenon; choices are what make it into form. Feeling is a conditioned phenomenon; choices are what make it into feeling. Perception is a conditioned phenomenon; choices are what make it into perception. Choices are conditioned phenomena; choices are what make them into choices. Consciousness is a conditioned phenomenon; choices are what make it into consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:5.5 -->

Choices produce conditioned phenomena; that’s why they’re called ‘choices’.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:6.1 -->

And why do you call it consciousness?

<!-- @segment sn22.79:6.2 -->

It cognizes; that’s why it’s called ‘consciousness’.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:6.3 -->

And what does it cognize?

<!-- @segment sn22.79:6.4 -->

It cognizes sour, bitter, pungent, sweet, hot, mild, salty, and bland.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:6.5 -->

It cognizes; that’s why it’s called ‘consciousness’.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:7.1 -->

A learned noble disciple reflects on this:

<!-- @segment sn22.79:7.2 -->

‘Currently I’m bitten by form.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:7.3 -->

In the past I was also bitten by form just like now.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:7.4 -->

If I were to look forward to enjoying form in the future, I’d be bitten by form in the future just as I am today.’

<!-- @segment sn22.79:7.5 -->

Reflecting like this they are not concerned with past form,

<!-- @segment sn22.79:7.6 -->

they don’t look forward to enjoying future form,

<!-- @segment sn22.79:7.7 -->

and they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding present form.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:8.1 -->

‘Currently I’m bitten by feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:8.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.79:8.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.79:8.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.79:8.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.79:8.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.79:8.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.79:9.1 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:9.2 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:9.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.79:9.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.79:9.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.79:9.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.79:9.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.79:9.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.79:10.1 -->

consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:10.2 -->

In the past I was also bitten by consciousness just like now.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:10.3 -->

If I were to look forward to enjoying consciousness in the future, I’d be bitten by consciousness in the future just as I am today.’

<!-- @segment sn22.79:10.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn22.79:10.5 -->

Reflecting like this they are not concerned with past consciousness,

<!-- @segment sn22.79:10.6 -->

they don’t look forward to enjoying future consciousness,

<!-- @segment sn22.79:10.7 -->

and they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding present consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:11.1 -->

What do you think, mendicants?

<!-- @segment sn22.79:11.2 -->

Is form permanent or impermanent?”

<!-- @segment sn22.79:11.3 -->

“Impermanent, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn22.79:11.4 -->

“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?”

<!-- @segment sn22.79:11.5 -->

“Suffering, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn22.79:11.6 -->

“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be regarded thus:

<!-- @segment sn22.79:11.7 -->

‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”

<!-- @segment sn22.79:11.8 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn22.79:11.9 -->

“Is feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:11.10 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:11.11 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:11.12 -->

consciousness permanent or impermanent?”

<!-- @segment sn22.79:11.13 -->

“Impermanent, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn22.79:11.14 -->

“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?”

<!-- @segment sn22.79:11.15 -->

“Suffering, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn22.79:11.16 -->

“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be regarded thus:

<!-- @segment sn22.79:11.17 -->

‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”

<!-- @segment sn22.79:11.18 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn22.79:11.19 -->

“So you should truly see any kind of form at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: <em>all</em> form—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

<!-- @segment sn22.79:11.20 -->

You should truly see any kind of feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:11.21 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:11.22 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:11.23 -->

consciousness at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: <em>all</em> consciousness—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.1 -->

This is called a noble disciple who gets rid of and doesn’t accumulate;

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.2 -->

who gives up and doesn’t grasp;

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.3 -->

who unmeshes and doesn’t enmesh;

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.4 -->

who dissipates and doesn’t get clouded.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.5 -->

And what things do they get rid of and not accumulate?

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.6 -->

They get rid of form and don’t accumulate it.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.7 -->

They get rid of feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.8 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.9 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.10 -->

consciousness and don’t accumulate it.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.11 -->

And what things do they give up and not grasp?

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.12 -->

They give up form and don’t grasp it.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.13 -->

They give up feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.14 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.15 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.16 -->

consciousness and don’t grasp it.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.17 -->

And what things do they unmesh and not enmesh?

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.18 -->

They unmesh form and don’t enmesh it.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.19 -->

They unmesh feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.20 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.21 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.22 -->

consciousness and don’t enmesh it.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.23 -->

And what things do they dissipate and not get clouded by?

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.24 -->

They dissipate form and don’t get clouded by it.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.25 -->

They dissipate feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.26 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.27 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:12.28 -->

consciousness and don’t get clouded by it.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:13.1 -->

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:13.2 -->

Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:13.3 -->

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.1 -->

This is called a mendicant who neither gets rid of nor accumulates, but remains after getting rid. They neither give up nor grasp, but remain after giving up. They neither unmesh nor enmesh, but remain after unmeshing. They neither dissipate nor get clouded, but remain after dissipating.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.2 -->

And what things do they neither get rid of nor accumulate, but remain after getting rid of them?

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.3 -->

They neither get rid of nor accumulate form, but remain after getting rid of it.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.4 -->

They neither get rid of nor accumulate feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.5 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.6 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.7 -->

consciousness, but remain after getting rid of it.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.8 -->

And what things do they neither give up nor grasp, but remain after giving them up?

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.9 -->

They neither give up nor grasp form, but remain after giving it up.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.10 -->

They neither give up nor grasp feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.11 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.12 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.13 -->

consciousness, but remain after giving it up.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.14 -->

And what things do they neither discard nor amass, but remain after discarding them?

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.15 -->

They neither unmesh nor enmesh form, but remain after unmeshing it.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.16 -->

They neither unmesh nor enmesh feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.17 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.18 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.19 -->

consciousness, but remain after unmeshing it.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.20 -->

And what things do they neither dissipate nor get clouded by, but remain after dissipating them?

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.21 -->

They neither dissipate nor get clouded by form, but remain after dissipating it.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.22 -->

They neither dissipate nor get clouded by feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.23 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.24 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.25 -->

consciousness, but remain after dissipating it.

<!-- @segment sn22.79:14.26 -->

When a mendicant’s mind is freed like this, the gods together with Indra, the Divinity, and the Progenitor worship them from afar:

<!-- @segment sn22.79:15.1 -->

‘Homage to you, O thoroughbred!

<!-- @segment sn22.79:15.2 -->

Homage to you, supreme among men!

<!-- @segment sn22.79:15.3 -->

We don’t understand

<!-- @segment sn22.79:15.4 -->

the basis of your absorption.’”
