---
slug: sn22.116
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: A Dhamma speaker (2nd)
description: The Buddha teaches on a dhamma speaker (2nd), applying the analysis of the five aggregates—form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness—to insight and release.
qualities: ending, dispassion, attachment, free from attachment
theme: wisdom, principle
---

<!-- @segment sn22.116:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn22.116:1.2 -->

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

<!-- @segment sn22.116:1.3 -->

“Sir, they speak of a ‘Dhamma speaker’.

<!-- @segment sn22.116:1.4 -->

How is a Dhamma speaker defined?

<!-- @segment sn22.116:1.5 -->

How is a mendicant who practices in line with the teaching defined? And how is a mendicant who has attained extinguishment in this very life defined?”

<!-- @segment sn22.116:1.6 -->

“Mendicant, if a mendicant teaches Dhamma for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding form, they’re qualified to be called ‘a mendicant who speaks on Dhamma’.

<!-- @segment sn22.116:1.7 -->

If they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding form, they’re qualified to be called ‘a mendicant who practices in line with the teaching’.

<!-- @segment sn22.116:1.8 -->

If they’re freed by not grasping by disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding form, they’re qualified to be called ‘a mendicant who has attained extinguishment in this very life’.

<!-- @segment sn22.116:1.9 -->

If a mendicant teaches Dhamma for disillusionment with feeling …

<!-- @segment sn22.116:1.10 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn22.116:1.11 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn22.116:1.12 -->

consciousness, for its fading away and cessation, they’re qualified to be called ‘a mendicant who speaks on Dhamma’.

<!-- @segment sn22.116:1.13 -->

If they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding consciousness, they’re qualified to be called ‘a mendicant who practices in line with the teaching’.

<!-- @segment sn22.116:1.14 -->

If they’re freed by not grasping by disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding consciousness, they’re qualified to be called ‘a mendicant who has attained extinguishment in this very life’.”
