---
slug: sn28.1
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Born of Seclusion
---

<!-- @segment sn28.1:1.1 -->

At one time Venerable Sāriputta was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment sn28.1:1.2 -->

Then Venerable Sāriputta robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms.

<!-- @segment sn28.1:1.3 -->

He wandered for alms in Sāvatthī. After the meal, on his return from almsround, he went to the Dark Forest for the day’s meditation,

<!-- @segment sn28.1:1.4 -->

plunged deep into it, and sat at the root of a tree to meditate.

<!-- @segment sn28.1:2.1 -->

Then in the late afternoon, Sāriputta came out of retreat and went to Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment sn28.1:2.2 -->

Venerable Ānanda saw him coming off in the distance,

<!-- @segment sn28.1:2.3 -->

and said to him:

<!-- @segment sn28.1:2.4 -->

“Reverend Sāriputta, your faculties are so very clear, and your complexion is pure and bright.

<!-- @segment sn28.1:2.5 -->

What meditation were you practicing today?”

<!-- @segment sn28.1:3.1 -->

“Reverend, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, I entered and remained in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment sn28.1:3.2 -->

But it didn’t occur to me:

<!-- @segment sn28.1:3.3 -->

‘I am entering the first absorption’ or ‘I have entered the first absorption’ or ‘I am emerging from the first absorption’.”

<!-- @segment sn28.1:3.4 -->

“That must be because Venerable Sāriputta has long ago totally eradicated I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit.

<!-- @segment sn28.1:3.5 -->

That’s why it didn’t occur to you:

<!-- @segment sn28.1:3.6 -->

‘I am entering the first absorption’ or ‘I have entered the first absorption’ or ‘I am emerging from the first absorption’.”
