---
slug: sn35.74
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Sick (1st)
---

<!-- @segment sn35.74:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn35.74:1.2 -->

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, and said to him,

<!-- @segment sn35.74:1.3 -->

“Sir, in such and such a monastery there’s a mendicant who is junior and not well-known. He’s sick, suffering, gravely ill.

<!-- @segment sn35.74:1.4 -->

Please go to him out of sympathy.”

<!-- @segment sn35.74:2.1 -->

When the Buddha heard that the mendicant was junior and ill, understanding that he was not well-known, he went to him.

<!-- @segment sn35.74:2.2 -->

That mendicant saw the Buddha coming off in the distance

<!-- @segment sn35.74:2.3 -->

and stirred in his cot.

<!-- @segment sn35.74:2.4 -->

The Buddha said to that monk,

<!-- @segment sn35.74:2.5 -->

“It’s all right, mendicant, don’t get up.

<!-- @segment sn35.74:2.6 -->

There are some seats spread out, I will sit there.”

<!-- @segment sn35.74:2.7 -->

He sat on the seat spread out

<!-- @segment sn35.74:2.8 -->

and said to the mendicant,

<!-- @segment sn35.74:2.9 -->

“I hope you’re keeping well, mendicant; I hope you’re all right. I hope that your pain is fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not its growing.”

<!-- @segment sn35.74:3.1 -->

“Sir, I’m not keeping well, I’m not getting by. The pain is terrible and growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its fading.”

<!-- @segment sn35.74:4.1 -->

“I hope you don’t have any remorse or regret?”

<!-- @segment sn35.74:5.1 -->

“Indeed, sir, I have no little remorse and regret.”

<!-- @segment sn35.74:6.1 -->

“I hope you have no reason to blame yourself when it comes to ethical conduct?”

<!-- @segment sn35.74:7.1 -->

“No sir, I have no reason to blame myself when it comes to ethical conduct.”

<!-- @segment sn35.74:8.1 -->

“In that case, mendicant, why do you have remorse and regret?”

<!-- @segment sn35.74:9.1 -->

“Because I understand that the Buddha has not taught the Dhamma merely for the sake of ethical purity.”

<!-- @segment sn35.74:10.1 -->

“If that is so, what then do you understand to be the purpose of teaching the Dhamma?”

<!-- @segment sn35.74:11.1 -->

“I understand that the Buddha has taught the Dhamma for the purpose of the fading away of greed.”

<!-- @segment sn35.74:12.1 -->

“Good, good, mendicant!

<!-- @segment sn35.74:12.2 -->

It’s good that you understand that I’ve taught the Dhamma for the purpose of the fading away of greed.

<!-- @segment sn35.74:12.3 -->

For that is indeed the purpose.

<!-- @segment sn35.74:12.4 -->

What do you think, mendicant?

<!-- @segment sn35.74:12.5 -->

Is the eye permanent or impermanent?”

<!-- @segment sn35.74:13.1 -->

“Impermanent, sir.” …

<!-- @segment sn35.74:14.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.74:14.2 -->

“Is the ear …

<!-- @segment sn35.74:14.3 -->

nose …

<!-- @segment sn35.74:14.4 -->

tongue …

<!-- @segment sn35.74:14.5 -->

body …

<!-- @segment sn35.74:14.6 -->

mind permanent or impermanent?”

<!-- @segment sn35.74:15.1 -->

“Impermanent, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn35.74:16.1 -->

“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?”

<!-- @segment sn35.74:17.1 -->

“Suffering, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn35.74:18.1 -->

“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be regarded thus:

<!-- @segment sn35.74:18.2 -->

‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”

<!-- @segment sn35.74:19.1 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn35.74:20.1 -->

“Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind.

<!-- @segment sn35.74:20.2 -->

Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed.

<!-- @segment sn35.74:20.3 -->

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended … there is nothing further for this place.’”

<!-- @segment sn35.74:21.1 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment sn35.74:21.2 -->

Satisfied, that mendicant approved what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment sn35.74:21.3 -->

And while this discourse was being spoken, the stainless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in that mendicant:

<!-- @segment sn35.74:21.4 -->

“Everything that is liable to arise is liable to cease.”
