---
slug: sn35.31
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Practice Conducive to Uprooting (1st)
description: The Buddha teaches on the internal and external sense bases regarding the practice conducive to uprooting (1st), analyzing the eye, sights, consciousness, contact, and feeling for insight and release.
qualities: delight, attachment, free from attachment, ill will
theme: wisdom
---

<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, I will teach you the practice that’s conducive to uprooting all conceiving.

<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.2 -->

Listen …

<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.3 -->

And what is the practice that’s conducive to uprooting all conceiving?

<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.4 -->

It’s when a mendicant does not conceive anything to be the eye, does not conceive it in the eye, does not conceive it as the eye, and does not conceive that ‘the eye is mine.’

<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.5 -->

They don’t conceive anything to be sights …

<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.6 -->

eye consciousness … eye contact. And they don’t conceive anything to be the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on eye contact. They don’t conceive it in that, they don’t conceive it as that, and they don’t conceive that ‘that is mine.’

<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.7 -->

For whatever you conceive it to be, whatever you conceive it in, whatever you conceive it as, and whatever you conceive to be ‘mine’: that becomes something else.

<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.8 -->

The world is attached to being, taking pleasure only in being, yet it becomes something else.

<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.9 -->

They don’t conceive anything to be the ear … nose … tongue …

<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.11 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.12 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.13 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.14 -->

body …

<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.15 -->

mind …

<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.16 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.17 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.18 -->

They don’t conceive anything to be the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on mind contact. They don’t conceive it in that, they don’t conceive it as that, and they don’t conceive that ‘that is mine.’

<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.19 -->

For whatever you conceive it to be, whatever you conceive it in, whatever you conceive it as, and whatever you conceive to be ‘mine’: that becomes something else.

<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.20 -->

The world is attached to being, taking pleasure only in being, yet it becomes something else.

<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.21 -->

As far as the aggregates, elements, and sense fields extend, they don’t conceive anything to be that, they don’t conceive it in that, they don’t conceive it as that, and they don’t conceive that ‘that is mine.’

<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.22 -->

Not conceiving, they don’t grasp at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.23 -->

Not grasping, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished.

<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.24 -->

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’

<!-- @segment sn35.31:1.25 -->

This is the practice that’s conducive to uprooting all conceiving.”
