---
slug: sn35.30
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Practice Fit for Uprooting
---

<!-- @segment sn35.30:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, I will teach you the practice fit for uprooting all conceiving.

<!-- @segment sn35.30:1.2 -->

Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak. …

<!-- @segment sn35.30:1.3 -->

And what is the practice fit for uprooting all conceiving?

<!-- @segment sn35.30:1.4 -->

It’s when a mendicant does not conceive anything to be the eye, does not conceive it in the eye, does not conceive it as the eye, and does not conceive that ‘the eye is mine.’

<!-- @segment sn35.30:1.5 -->

They don’t conceive anything to be sights, they don’t conceive it in sights, they don’t conceive it as sights, and they don’t conceive that ‘sights are mine.’

<!-- @segment sn35.30:1.6 -->

They don’t conceive eye consciousness …

<!-- @segment sn35.30:1.7 -->

eye contact …

<!-- @segment sn35.30:1.8 -->

They don’t conceive anything to be the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on eye contact. They don’t conceive it in that, they don’t conceive it as that, and they don’t conceive that ‘that is mine.’

<!-- @segment sn35.30:1.9 -->

They don’t conceive anything to be the ear … nose … tongue …

<!-- @segment sn35.30:1.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.30:1.11 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.30:1.12 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.30:1.13 -->

body …

<!-- @segment sn35.30:1.14 -->

mind …

<!-- @segment sn35.30:1.15 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.30:1.16 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.30:1.17 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.30:1.18 -->

They don’t conceive anything to be the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on mind contact. They don’t conceive it in that, they don’t conceive it as that, and they don’t conceive that ‘that is mine.’

<!-- @segment sn35.30:1.19 -->

They don’t conceive anything to be all, they don’t conceive it in all, they don’t conceive it as all, and they don’t conceive that ‘all is mine.’

<!-- @segment sn35.30:1.20 -->

Not conceiving, they don’t grasp at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment sn35.30:1.21 -->

Not grasping, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished.

<!-- @segment sn35.30:1.22 -->

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’

<!-- @segment sn35.30:1.23 -->

This is the practice fit for uprooting all conceiving.”
