---
slug: sn35.119
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Question of Pañcasikha
description: The Buddha teaches on the six sense bases regarding the question of pañcasikha, guiding disciples toward discernment of sense experience and release from clinging.
qualities: attachment, wisdom
theme: wisdom, story
---

<!-- @segment sn35.119:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain.

<!-- @segment sn35.119:1.2 -->

And then the centaur Pañcasikha went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him:

<!-- @segment sn35.119:1.3 -->

“What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why some sentient beings are not fully extinguished in this very life?

<!-- @segment sn35.119:1.4 -->

What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why some sentient beings are fully extinguished in this very life?”

<!-- @segment sn35.119:1.5 -->

“Pañcasikha, there are sights known by the eye …

<!-- @segment sn35.119:1.6 -->

ideas known by the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing.

<!-- @segment sn35.119:1.7 -->

If a mendicant approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them,

<!-- @segment sn35.119:1.8 -->

their consciousness has that as support and fuel for grasping.

<!-- @segment sn35.119:1.9 -->

A mendicant with fuel for grasping does not become extinguished.

<!-- @segment sn35.119:1.10 -->

That’s the cause, that’s the reason why some sentient beings are not fully extinguished in this very life.

<!-- @segment sn35.119:2.1 -->

There are sights known by the eye …

<!-- @segment sn35.119:2.2 -->

ideas known by the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing.

<!-- @segment sn35.119:2.3 -->

If a mendicant doesn’t approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, their consciousness doesn’t have that as support and fuel for grasping.

<!-- @segment sn35.119:2.4 -->

A mendicant free of grasping becomes extinguished.

<!-- @segment sn35.119:2.5 -->

That’s the cause, that’s the reason why some sentient beings are fully extinguished in this very life.”
