---
slug: sn35.26
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Without Completely Understanding (1st)
---

<!-- @segment sn35.26:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, without directly knowing and completely understanding the all, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can’t end suffering.

<!-- @segment sn35.26:1.2 -->

And what is the all, without directly knowing and completely understanding which, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can’t end suffering?

<!-- @segment sn35.26:1.3 -->

Without directly knowing and completely understanding the eye, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can’t end suffering.

<!-- @segment sn35.26:1.4 -->

Without directly knowing and completely understanding sights …

<!-- @segment sn35.26:1.5 -->

eye consciousness …

<!-- @segment sn35.26:1.6 -->

eye contact …

<!-- @segment sn35.26:1.7 -->

painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on eye contact, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can’t end suffering.

<!-- @segment sn35.26:1.8 -->

Without directly knowing and completely understanding the ear … the nose … the tongue …

<!-- @segment sn35.26:1.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.26:1.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.26:1.11 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.26:1.12 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.26:1.13 -->

the body …

<!-- @segment sn35.26:1.14 -->

the mind, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can’t end suffering.

<!-- @segment sn35.26:1.15 -->

Without directly knowing and completely understanding ideas …

<!-- @segment sn35.26:1.16 -->

mind consciousness …

<!-- @segment sn35.26:1.17 -->

mind contact …

<!-- @segment sn35.26:1.18 -->

painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on mind contact, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can’t end suffering.

<!-- @segment sn35.26:1.19 -->

This is the all, without directly knowing and completely understanding which, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can’t end suffering.

<!-- @segment sn35.26:2.1 -->

By directly knowing and completely understanding the all, having dispassion for it and giving it up, you can end suffering.

<!-- @segment sn35.26:2.2 -->

And what is the all, directly knowing and completely understanding which, having dispassion for it and giving it up, you can end suffering?

<!-- @segment sn35.26:2.3 -->

By directly knowing and completely understanding the eye …

<!-- @segment sn35.26:2.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.26:2.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.26:2.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.26:2.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.26:2.8 -->

the ear … the nose … the tongue …

<!-- @segment sn35.26:2.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.26:2.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.26:2.11 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.26:2.12 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.26:2.13 -->

the body …

<!-- @segment sn35.26:2.14 -->

the mind, having dispassion for it and giving it up, you can end suffering.

<!-- @segment sn35.26:2.15 -->

By directly knowing and completely understanding ideas …

<!-- @segment sn35.26:2.16 -->

mind consciousness …

<!-- @segment sn35.26:2.17 -->

mind contact …

<!-- @segment sn35.26:2.18 -->

painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on mind contact, having dispassion for it and giving it up, you can end suffering.

<!-- @segment sn35.26:2.19 -->

This is the all, directly knowing and completely understanding which, having dispassion for it and giving it up, you can end suffering.”
