---
slug: sn35.29
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Overcome
---

<!-- @segment sn35.29:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn35.29:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground.

<!-- @segment sn35.29:1.3 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment sn35.29:1.4 -->

“Mendicants, all is overcome.

<!-- @segment sn35.29:1.5 -->

And what is the all that is overcome?

<!-- @segment sn35.29:1.6 -->

The eye is overcome. Sights are overcome. Eye consciousness is overcome. Eye contact is overcome. The painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on eye contact is also overcome.

<!-- @segment sn35.29:1.7 -->

Overcome by what?

<!-- @segment sn35.29:1.8 -->

Overcome by the fires of greed, hate, and delusion. Overcome by rebirth, old age, and death, by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress, I say.

<!-- @segment sn35.29:1.9 -->

The ear … nose … tongue …

<!-- @segment sn35.29:1.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.29:1.11 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.29:1.12 -->

body …

<!-- @segment sn35.29:1.13 -->

mind is overcome. Ideas are overcome. Mind consciousness is overcome. Mind contact is overcome. The painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact is also overcome.

<!-- @segment sn35.29:1.14 -->

Overcome by what?

<!-- @segment sn35.29:1.15 -->

Overcome by greed, hate, and delusion. Overcome by rebirth, old age, and death, by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress, I say.

<!-- @segment sn35.29:1.16 -->

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye, sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact. And they grow disillusioned with the painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on eye contact.

<!-- @segment sn35.29:1.17 -->

They grow disillusioned with the ear … nose … tongue … body … mind … painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on mind contact.

<!-- @segment sn35.29:1.18 -->

Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed.

<!-- @segment sn35.29:1.19 -->

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’”
