---
slug: sn35.238
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Simile of the Vipers
---

<!-- @segment sn35.238:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, suppose there were four venomous vipers of awesome might.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:1.2 -->

Then a person would come along who wants to live and doesn’t want to die, who wants to be happy and recoils from pain.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:1.3 -->

They’d say to him,

<!-- @segment sn35.238:1.4 -->

‘My man, here are four venomous vipers of awesome might. They must be periodically picked up, washed, fed, and put to sleep.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:1.5 -->

But when one or other of these four venomous vipers gets angry with you, you’ll meet with death or deadly pain.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:1.6 -->

So then, my man, do what has to be done.’

<!-- @segment sn35.238:2.1 -->

Then that man, terrified of those four venomous vipers, would flee this way or that.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:2.2 -->

They’d say to him,

<!-- @segment sn35.238:2.3 -->

‘My man, there are five deadly enemies chasing you, thinking: “When we catch sight of him, we’ll murder him right there!”

<!-- @segment sn35.238:2.4 -->

So then, my man, do what has to be done.’

<!-- @segment sn35.238:3.1 -->

Then that man, terrified of those four venomous vipers and those five deadly enemies, would flee this way or that.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:3.2 -->

They’d say to him,

<!-- @segment sn35.238:3.3 -->

‘My man, there’s a sixth hidden killer chasing you with a drawn sword, thinking: “When I catch sight of him, I’ll chop off his head right there!”

<!-- @segment sn35.238:3.4 -->

So then, my man, do what has to be done.’

<!-- @segment sn35.238:4.1 -->

Then that man, terrified of those four venomous vipers and those five deadly enemies and the hidden killer, would flee this way or that.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:4.2 -->

He’d see an empty village.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:4.3 -->

But whatever house he enters is vacant, deserted, and empty.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:4.4 -->

And whatever vessel he touches is vacant, hollow, and empty.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:4.5 -->

They’d say to him,

<!-- @segment sn35.238:4.6 -->

‘My man, there are bandits who raid villages, and they’re striking now.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:4.7 -->

So then, my man, do what has to be done.’

<!-- @segment sn35.238:5.1 -->

Then that man, terrified of those four venomous vipers and those five deadly enemies and the hidden killer and the bandits, would flee this way or that.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:5.2 -->

He’d see a large deluge, whose near shore is dubious and perilous, while the far shore is a sanctuary free of peril.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:5.3 -->

But there’s no ferryboat or bridge for crossing over.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:5.4 -->

Then that man would think,

<!-- @segment sn35.238:5.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.238:5.6 -->

‘Why don’t I gather grass, sticks, branches, and leaves and make a raft? Riding on the raft, and paddling with my hands and feet, I can safely reach the far shore.’

<!-- @segment sn35.238:6.1 -->

And so that man did exactly that. Having crossed over and gone to the far shore, the brahmin stands on solid ground.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:7.1 -->

I’ve made up this simile to make a point.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:7.2 -->

And this is the point.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:7.3 -->

‘Four venomous vipers of awesome might’ is a term for the four principal states:

<!-- @segment sn35.238:7.4 -->

the elements of earth, water, fire, and air.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:8.1 -->

‘Five deadly enemies’ is a term for the five grasping aggregates, that is:

<!-- @segment sn35.238:8.2 -->

form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:9.1 -->

‘The sixth hidden killer with a drawn sword’ is a term for relishing and greed.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:10.1 -->

‘Empty village’ is a term for the six interior sense fields.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:10.2 -->

If an astute, competent, clever person investigates this in relation to the eye, it appears vacant, hollow, and empty.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:10.3 -->

If an astute, competent, clever person investigates this in relation to the ear … nose … tongue … body …

<!-- @segment sn35.238:10.4 -->

mind, it appears vacant, hollow, and empty.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:11.1 -->

‘Bandits who raid villages’ is a term for the six exterior sense fields.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:11.2 -->

The eye is struck by both agreeable and disagreeable sights.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:11.3 -->

The ear …

<!-- @segment sn35.238:11.4 -->

nose …

<!-- @segment sn35.238:11.5 -->

tongue …

<!-- @segment sn35.238:11.6 -->

body …

<!-- @segment sn35.238:11.7 -->

mind is struck by both agreeable and disagreeable ideas.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:12.1 -->

‘Large deluge’ is a term for the four floods:

<!-- @segment sn35.238:12.2 -->

the floods of sensual pleasures, desire to be reborn, views, and ignorance.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:13.1 -->

‘The near shore that’s dubious and perilous’ is a term for substantial reality.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:14.1 -->

‘The far shore, a sanctuary free of peril’ is a term for extinguishment.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:15.1 -->

‘The raft’ is a term for the noble eightfold path, that is:

<!-- @segment sn35.238:15.2 -->

right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:16.1 -->

‘Paddling with hands and feet’ is a term for rousing energy.

<!-- @segment sn35.238:17.1 -->

‘Crossed over, gone to the far shore, the brahmin stands on solid ground’ is a term for a perfected one.”
