---
slug: sn35.133
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Verahaccāni
---

<!-- @segment sn35.133:1.1 -->

At one time Venerable Udāyī was staying near Kāmaṇḍā in the brahmin Todeyya’s mango grove.

<!-- @segment sn35.133:1.2 -->

Then a boy who was a pupil of the brahmin lady of the Verahaccāni clan went up to Udāyī and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment sn35.133:1.3 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side.

<!-- @segment sn35.133:1.4 -->

Udāyī educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired that young student with a Dhamma talk.

<!-- @segment sn35.133:1.5 -->

Then that young student went to the brahmin lady of the Verahaccāni clan and said to her,

<!-- @segment sn35.133:1.6 -->

“Please, madam, you should know this.

<!-- @segment sn35.133:1.7 -->

The ascetic Udāyī proclaims a teaching that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure.”

<!-- @segment sn35.133:2.1 -->

“Then, young student, invite him in my name for tomorrow’s meal.”

<!-- @segment sn35.133:2.2 -->

“Yes, madam,” he replied. He went to Udāyī and said,

<!-- @segment sn35.133:2.3 -->

“Sir, would Mister Udāyī please accept an offering of tomorrow’s meal from my tutor’s wife, the brahmin lady of the Verahaccāni clan?”

<!-- @segment sn35.133:2.4 -->

Udāyī consented with silence.

<!-- @segment sn35.133:2.5 -->

Then when the night had passed, Udāyī robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the brahmin lady’s home, and sat down on the seat spread out.

<!-- @segment sn35.133:2.6 -->

Then the brahmin lady served and satisfied Udāyī with her own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods.

<!-- @segment sn35.133:2.7 -->

When Udāyī had eaten and washed his hand and bowl, she put on a pair of slippers, sat on a high seat, covered her head, and said to him,

<!-- @segment sn35.133:2.8 -->

“Ascetic, preach the Dhamma.”

<!-- @segment sn35.133:2.9 -->

“There will be an occasion for that, sister,” he replied, then rose from his seat and left.

<!-- @segment sn35.133:3.1 -->

For a second time that young student went to Venerable Udāyī …

<!-- @segment sn35.133:3.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.133:3.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.133:3.4 -->

And for a second time that young student went to the brahmin lady of the Verahaccāni clan …

<!-- @segment sn35.133:3.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.133:3.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.133:4.1 -->

She said to him, “You keep praising the ascetic Udāyī like this.

<!-- @segment sn35.133:4.2 -->

But when I asked him to preach the Dhamma he just said that there would be an occasion for that, and then he got up and left.”

<!-- @segment sn35.133:4.3 -->

“Madam, that’s because you put on a pair of slippers, sat on a high seat, and covered your head before inviting him to teach.

<!-- @segment sn35.133:4.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.133:4.5 -->

For the good fellows respect the teaching.”

<!-- @segment sn35.133:4.6 -->

“Then, young student, invite him in my name for tomorrow’s meal.”

<!-- @segment sn35.133:4.7 -->

“Yes, madam,” he replied. …

<!-- @segment sn35.133:4.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.133:4.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.133:5.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.133:5.2 -->

Then the brahmin lady served and satisfied Udāyī with her own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods.

<!-- @segment sn35.133:5.3 -->

When Udāyī had eaten and washed his hand and bowl, she took off her slippers, sat on a low seat, uncovered her head, and said to him,

<!-- @segment sn35.133:5.4 -->

“Sir, when what exists do the perfected ones declare that there is pleasure and pain? When what doesn’t exist do the perfected ones not declare that there is pleasure and pain?”

<!-- @segment sn35.133:6.1 -->

“Sister, when there’s an eye, the perfected ones declare that there is pleasure and pain. When there’s no eye, the perfected ones don’t declare that there is pleasure and pain.

<!-- @segment sn35.133:6.2 -->

When there’s an ear … nose … tongue … body …

<!-- @segment sn35.133:6.3 -->

mind, the perfected ones declare that there is pleasure and pain. When there’s no mind, the perfected ones don’t declare that there is pleasure and pain.”

<!-- @segment sn35.133:7.1 -->

When he said this, the brahmin lady said to Udāyī,

<!-- @segment sn35.133:7.2 -->

“Excellent, sir! Excellent!

<!-- @segment sn35.133:7.3 -->

As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, Master Udāyī has made the teaching clear in many ways.

<!-- @segment sn35.133:7.4 -->

I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment sn35.133:7.5 -->

From this day forth, may Master Udāyī remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”

<!-- @segment sn35.133:7.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.133:7.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.133:8.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.133:8.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.133:8.3 -->
