---
slug: sn35.134
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: At Devadaha
description: The Buddha teaches how contemplating the six sense bases leads to the fading away of the fetters and the ending of suffering.
qualities: diligence, mindfulness, vigour, negligence, desire, safety
theme: wisdom, training guideline
---

<!-- @segment sn35.134:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near the Sakyan town named Devadaha.

<!-- @segment sn35.134:1.2 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment sn35.134:1.3 -->

“When it comes to the six fields of contact, mendicants, I don’t say that all mendicants have work to do with diligence, nor do I say that none of them have work to do with diligence.

<!-- @segment sn35.134:1.4 -->

I say that, when it comes to the six fields of contact, mendicants don’t have work to do with diligence if they are perfected, with defilements ended, having completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their heart’s goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and become rightly freed through enlightenment.

<!-- @segment sn35.134:1.5 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment sn35.134:1.6 -->

They’ve done their work with diligence, and are incapable of negligence.

<!-- @segment sn35.134:1.7 -->

I say that, when it comes to the six fields of contact, mendicants do have work to do with diligence if they are trainees, who haven’t achieved their heart’s desire, but live aspiring to the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.

<!-- @segment sn35.134:1.8 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment sn35.134:1.9 -->

There are sights known by the eye that are pleasant and also those that are unpleasant.

<!-- @segment sn35.134:1.10 -->

Though experiencing them again and again they don’t occupy the mind.

<!-- @segment sn35.134:1.11 -->

Their energy is roused up and unflagging, their mindfulness is established and lucid, their body is tranquil and undisturbed, and their mind is immersed in samādhi and unified.

<!-- @segment sn35.134:1.12 -->

Seeing this fruit of diligence, I say that those mendicants have work to do with diligence when it comes to the six fields of contact. …

<!-- @segment sn35.134:1.13 -->

There are ideas known by the mind that are pleasant and also those that are unpleasant.

<!-- @segment sn35.134:1.14 -->

Though experiencing them again and again they don’t occupy the mind.

<!-- @segment sn35.134:1.15 -->

Their energy is roused up and unflagging, their mindfulness is established and lucid, their body is tranquil and undisturbed, and their mind is immersed in samādhi and unified.

<!-- @segment sn35.134:1.16 -->

Seeing this fruit of diligence, I say that those mendicants have work to do with diligence when it comes to the six fields of contact.”
