---
slug: sn35.93
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: A Duality (2nd)
---

<!-- @segment sn35.93:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, consciousness originates dependent on a duality.

<!-- @segment sn35.93:1.2 -->

And what is that duality?

<!-- @segment sn35.93:1.3 -->

Eye consciousness arises dependent on the eye and sights.

<!-- @segment sn35.93:1.4 -->

The eye is impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

<!-- @segment sn35.93:1.5 -->

Sights are impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

<!-- @segment sn35.93:1.6 -->

So this duality is tottering and toppling; it’s impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

<!-- @segment sn35.93:1.7 -->

Eye consciousness is impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

<!-- @segment sn35.93:1.8 -->

And the causes and reasons that give rise to eye consciousness are also impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

<!-- @segment sn35.93:1.9 -->

But since eye consciousness has arisen dependent on conditions that are impermanent, how could it be permanent?

<!-- @segment sn35.93:1.10 -->

The meeting, coming together, and joining together of these three things is called eye contact.

<!-- @segment sn35.93:1.11 -->

Eye contact is also impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

<!-- @segment sn35.93:1.12 -->

And the causes and reasons that give rise to eye contact are also impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

<!-- @segment sn35.93:1.13 -->

But since eye contact has arisen dependent on conditions that are impermanent, how could it be permanent?

<!-- @segment sn35.93:1.14 -->

Contacted one feels; contacted one intends; contacted one perceives.

<!-- @segment sn35.93:1.15 -->

So these things too are tottering and toppling; they’re impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

<!-- @segment sn35.93:2.1 -->

Ear consciousness … Nose consciousness … Tongue consciousness … Body consciousness …

<!-- @segment sn35.93:2.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.93:2.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.93:2.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.93:2.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.93:2.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.93:2.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.93:2.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.93:2.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.93:2.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.93:2.11 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.93:2.12 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.93:2.13 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.93:3.1 -->

Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and ideas.

<!-- @segment sn35.93:3.2 -->

The mind is impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

<!-- @segment sn35.93:3.3 -->

Ideas are impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

<!-- @segment sn35.93:3.4 -->

So this duality is tottering and toppling; it’s impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

<!-- @segment sn35.93:3.5 -->

Mind consciousness is impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

<!-- @segment sn35.93:3.6 -->

And the causes and reasons that give rise to mind consciousness are also impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

<!-- @segment sn35.93:3.7 -->

But since mind consciousness has arisen dependent on conditions that are impermanent, how could it be permanent?

<!-- @segment sn35.93:3.8 -->

The meeting, coming together, and joining together of these three things is called mind contact.

<!-- @segment sn35.93:3.9 -->

Mind contact is also impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

<!-- @segment sn35.93:3.10 -->

And the causes and reasons that give rise to mind contact are also impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

<!-- @segment sn35.93:3.11 -->

But since mind contact has arisen dependent on conditions that are impermanent, how could it be permanent?

<!-- @segment sn35.93:3.12 -->

Contacted one feels; contacted one intends; contacted one perceives.

<!-- @segment sn35.93:3.13 -->

So these things too are tottering and toppling; they’re impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

<!-- @segment sn35.93:3.14 -->

This is how consciousness originates dependent on a duality.”

<!-- @segment sn35.93:3.15 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.93:3.16 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.93:4.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.93:4.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.93:4.3 -->
