---
slug: sn35.243
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Explanation on the Festering
---

<!-- @segment sn35.243:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:1.2 -->

Now at that time a new town hall had recently been constructed for the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu. It had not yet been occupied by an ascetic or brahmin or any human at all.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:1.3 -->

Then the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:1.4 -->

“Sir, a new town hall has recently been constructed for the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu. It has not yet been occupied by an ascetic or brahmin or any human at all.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:1.5 -->

May the Buddha be the first to use it,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:1.6 -->

and only then will the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu use it.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:1.7 -->

That would be for the lasting welfare and happiness of the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu.”

<!-- @segment sn35.243:1.8 -->

The Buddha consented with silence.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:2.1 -->

Knowing that the Buddha had consented, the Sakyans rose from their seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on their right. Then they went to the new town hall, where they spread carpets all over, prepared seats, set up a water jar, and placed an oil lamp. Then they went back to the Buddha and told him of their preparations, saying,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:2.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.243:2.3 -->

“Please, sir, come at your convenience.”

<!-- @segment sn35.243:2.4 -->

Then the Buddha robed up and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the new town hall together with the Saṅgha of mendicants. Having washed his feet he entered the town hall and sat against the central column facing east.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:2.5 -->

The Saṅgha of mendicants also washed their feet, entered the town hall, and sat against the west wall facing east, with the Buddha right in front of them.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:2.6 -->

The Sakyans of Kapilavatthu also washed their feet, entered the town hall, and sat against the east wall facing west, with the Buddha right in front of them.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:2.7 -->

The Buddha spent much of the night educating, encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the Sakyans with a Dhamma talk. Then he sent them off, saying,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:2.8 -->

“The night is getting late, Gotamas.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:2.9 -->

Please go at your convenience.”

<!-- @segment sn35.243:2.10 -->

“Yes, sir,” replied the Sakyans. They rose from their seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on their right, before leaving.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:3.1 -->

And then, soon after the Sakyans had left, the Buddha addressed Venerable Mahāmoggallāna,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:3.2 -->

“Moggallāna, the Saṅgha of mendicants is rid of dullness and drowsiness.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:3.3 -->

Give them some Dhamma talk as you feel inspired.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:3.4 -->

My back is sore,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:3.5 -->

I’ll stretch it.”

<!-- @segment sn35.243:3.6 -->

“Yes, sir,” Mahāmoggallāna replied.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:3.7 -->

And then the Buddha spread out his outer robe folded in four and laid down in the lion’s posture—on the right side, placing one foot on top of the other—mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:3.8 -->

There Venerable Mahāmoggallāna addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment sn35.243:3.9 -->

“Reverends, mendicants!”

<!-- @segment sn35.243:3.10 -->

“Reverend,” they replied.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:3.11 -->

Venerable Mahāmoggallāna said this:

<!-- @segment sn35.243:3.12 -->

“I will teach you the explanation of the festering and the not festering.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:3.13 -->

Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment sn35.243:3.14 -->

“Yes, reverend,” they replied.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:3.15 -->

Venerable Mahāmoggallāna said this:

<!-- @segment sn35.243:4.1 -->

“And how is someone festering?

<!-- @segment sn35.243:4.2 -->

Take a mendicant who sees a sight with the eye. If it’s pleasant they hold on to it, but if it’s unpleasant they dislike it. They live with mindfulness of the body unestablished and their heart stunted.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:4.3 -->

And they don’t truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without remainder.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:4.4 -->

They hear a sound … smell an odor … taste a flavor … feel a touch …

<!-- @segment sn35.243:4.5 -->

know an idea with the mind. If it’s pleasant they hold on to it, but if it’s unpleasant they dislike it. They live with mindfulness of the body unestablished and their heart stunted.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:4.6 -->

And they don’t truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without remainder.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:4.7 -->

This is called a mendicant who is festering when it comes to sights known by the eye,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:4.8 -->

sounds … smells … tastes … touches …

<!-- @segment sn35.243:4.9 -->

ideas known by the mind.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:4.10 -->

When a mendicant lives like this, if Māra comes at them through the eye he finds a vulnerability and gets an opportunity.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:4.11 -->

If Māra comes at them through the ear … nose … tongue … body …

<!-- @segment sn35.243:4.12 -->

mind he finds a vulnerability and gets an opportunity.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:5.1 -->

Suppose there was a house made of reeds or straw that was dried up, withered, and decrepit.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:5.2 -->

If a person came to it with a burning grass torch from the east,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:5.3 -->

west,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:5.4 -->

north,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:5.5 -->

south,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:5.6 -->

below,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:5.7 -->

above,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:5.8 -->

or from anywhere, the fire would find a vulnerability, it would get an opportunity.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:5.9 -->

In the same way, when a mendicant lives like this, if Māra comes at them through the eye he finds a vulnerability and gets an opportunity.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:5.10 -->

If Māra comes at them through the ear … nose … tongue … body …

<!-- @segment sn35.243:5.11 -->

mind he finds a vulnerability and gets an opportunity.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:5.12 -->

When a mendicant lives like this, they’re mastered by sights,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:5.13 -->

sounds,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:5.14 -->

smells,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:5.15 -->

tastes,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:5.16 -->

touches,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:5.17 -->

and ideas, they don’t master these things.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:5.18 -->

This is called a mendicant who has been mastered by sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. They’re mastered, not a master. Bad, unskillful qualities have mastered them, which are corrupting, leading to future lives, hurtful, and resulting in suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:5.19 -->

That’s how someone is festering.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:6.1 -->

And how is someone not festering?

<!-- @segment sn35.243:6.2 -->

Take a mendicant who sees a sight with the eye. If it’s pleasant they don’t hold on to it, and if it’s unpleasant they don’t dislike it. They live with mindfulness of the body established and a limitless heart.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:6.3 -->

And they truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without remainder.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:6.4 -->

They hear a sound … smell an odor … taste a flavor … feel a touch …

<!-- @segment sn35.243:6.5 -->

know an idea with the mind. If it’s pleasant they don’t hold on to it, and if it’s unpleasant they don’t dislike it. They live with mindfulness of the body established and a limitless heart.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:6.6 -->

And they truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without remainder.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:6.7 -->

This is called a mendicant who is not festering when it comes to sights known by the eye,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:6.8 -->

sounds … smells … tastes … touches … ideas known by the mind.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:6.9 -->

When a mendicant lives like this, if Māra comes at them through the eye he doesn’t find a vulnerability or get an opportunity.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:6.10 -->

If Māra comes at them through the ear … nose … tongue … body …

<!-- @segment sn35.243:6.11 -->

mind he doesn’t find a vulnerability or get an opportunity.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:7.1 -->

Suppose there was a bungalow or hall made of thick clay with its plaster still wet.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:7.2 -->

If a person came to it with a burning grass torch from the east,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:7.3 -->

west,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:7.4 -->

north,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:7.5 -->

south,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:7.6 -->

below,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:7.7 -->

above,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:7.8 -->

or from anywhere, the fire wouldn’t find a vulnerability, it would get no opportunity.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:7.9 -->

In the same way, when a mendicant lives like this, if Māra comes at them through the eye he doesn’t find a vulnerability or get an opportunity.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:7.10 -->

If Māra comes at them through the ear … nose … tongue … body … mind he doesn’t find a vulnerability or get an opportunity.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:7.11 -->

When a mendicant lives like this, they master sights,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:7.12 -->

sounds,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:7.13 -->

smells,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:7.14 -->

tastes,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:7.15 -->

touches,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:7.16 -->

and ideas, they’re not mastered by these things.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:7.17 -->

This is called a mendicant who has mastered sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. They’re a master, not mastered. Bad, unskillful qualities have been mastered by them, which are corrupting, leading to future lives, hurtful, and resulting in suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:7.18 -->

That’s how someone is not festering.”

<!-- @segment sn35.243:8.1 -->

Then the Buddha got up and said to Venerable Mahāmoggallāna:

<!-- @segment sn35.243:8.2 -->

“Good, good, Moggallāna!

<!-- @segment sn35.243:8.3 -->

It’s good that you’ve taught this explanation of the festering and the not festering.”

<!-- @segment sn35.243:9.1 -->

This is what Venerable Mahāmoggallāna said,

<!-- @segment sn35.243:9.2 -->

and the teacher approved.

<!-- @segment sn35.243:9.3 -->

Satisfied, the mendicants approved what Mahāmoggallāna said.
