---
slug: sn35.13
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Before My Awakening (Interior)
---

<!-- @segment sn35.13:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn35.13:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, before my awakening—when I was still unawakened but intent on awakening—I thought:

<!-- @segment sn35.13:1.3 -->

‘What’s the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to the eye …

<!-- @segment sn35.13:1.4 -->

ear …

<!-- @segment sn35.13:1.5 -->

nose …

<!-- @segment sn35.13:1.6 -->

tongue …

<!-- @segment sn35.13:1.7 -->

body …

<!-- @segment sn35.13:1.8 -->

and mind?’

<!-- @segment sn35.13:1.9 -->

Then it occurred to me:

<!-- @segment sn35.13:1.10 -->

‘The pleasure and happiness that arise from the eye: this is its gratification.

<!-- @segment sn35.13:1.11 -->

That the eye is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback.

<!-- @segment sn35.13:1.12 -->

Removing and giving up desire and greed for the eye: this is its escape.

<!-- @segment sn35.13:1.13 -->

The pleasure and happiness that arise from the ear …

<!-- @segment sn35.13:1.14 -->

nose …

<!-- @segment sn35.13:1.15 -->

tongue …

<!-- @segment sn35.13:1.16 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.13:1.17 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.13:1.18 -->

body …

<!-- @segment sn35.13:1.19 -->

mind: this is its gratification.

<!-- @segment sn35.13:1.20 -->

That the mind is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback.

<!-- @segment sn35.13:1.21 -->

Removing and giving up desire and greed for the mind: this is its escape.’

<!-- @segment sn35.13:2.1 -->

As long as I didn’t truly understand these six interior sense fields’ gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for what they are, I didn’t announce my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

<!-- @segment sn35.13:2.2 -->

But when I did truly understand these six interior sense fields’ gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for what they are, I announced my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

<!-- @segment sn35.13:2.3 -->

Knowledge and vision arose in me:

<!-- @segment sn35.13:2.4 -->

‘My freedom is unshakable; this is my last rebirth; now there’ll be no more future lives.’”
