---
slug: sn35.91
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Turbulence (2nd)
---

<!-- @segment sn35.91:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, turbulence is a disease, a boil, a dart.

<!-- @segment sn35.91:1.2 -->

That’s why the Realized One lives unperturbed, with dart drawn out.

<!-- @segment sn35.91:1.3 -->

Now, a mendicant might wish: ‘May I live unperturbed, with dart drawn out.’

<!-- @segment sn35.91:1.4 -->

So let them not conceive anything to be the eye, let them not conceive it in the eye, let them not conceive it as the eye, let them not conceive that ‘the eye is mine.’

<!-- @segment sn35.91:1.5 -->

Let them not conceive sights …

<!-- @segment sn35.91:1.6 -->

eye consciousness …

<!-- @segment sn35.91:1.7 -->

eye contact …

<!-- @segment sn35.91:1.8 -->

Let them not conceive anything to be the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on eye contact. Let them not conceive it in that, let them not conceive it as that, and let them not conceive that ‘that is mine.’

<!-- @segment sn35.91:1.9 -->

For whatever you conceive it to be, whatever you conceive it in, whatever you conceive it as, and whatever you conceive to be ‘mine’: that becomes something else.

<!-- @segment sn35.91:1.10 -->

The world is attached to being, taking pleasure only in being, yet it becomes something else.

<!-- @segment sn35.91:2.1 -->

Let them not conceive anything to be the ear … nose … tongue … body …

<!-- @segment sn35.91:2.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.91:2.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.91:2.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.91:2.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.91:2.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.91:3.1 -->

Let them not conceive anything to be the mind …

<!-- @segment sn35.91:3.2 -->

mind consciousness …

<!-- @segment sn35.91:3.3 -->

mind contact …

<!-- @segment sn35.91:3.4 -->

Let them not conceive anything to be the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on mind contact. Let them not conceive it in that, let them not conceive it as that, and let them not conceive that ‘that is mine.’

<!-- @segment sn35.91:3.5 -->

For whatever you conceive it to be, whatever you conceive it in, whatever you conceive it as, and whatever you conceive to be ‘mine’: that becomes something else.

<!-- @segment sn35.91:3.6 -->

The world is attached to being, taking pleasure only in being, yet it becomes something else.

<!-- @segment sn35.91:4.1 -->

As far as the aggregates, elements, and sense fields extend, they don’t conceive anything to be that, they don’t conceive it in that, they don’t conceive it as that, and they don’t conceive that ‘that is mine.’

<!-- @segment sn35.91:4.2 -->

Not conceiving, they don’t grasp at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment sn35.91:4.3 -->

Not grasping, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished.

<!-- @segment sn35.91:4.4 -->

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’”
