---
slug: sn35.116
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Traveling to the End of the World
description: The Buddha teaches on the six sense bases regarding traveling to the end of the world, guiding disciples toward discernment of sense experience and release from clinging.
qualities: suffering, truth, vision, liberation, wisdom, desire
theme: wisdom, training guideline
---

<!-- @segment sn35.116:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, I say it’s not possible to know or see or reach the end of the world by traveling.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:1.2 -->

But I also say there’s no making an end of suffering without reaching the end of the world.”

<!-- @segment sn35.116:1.3 -->

When he had spoken, the Blessed One rose from his seat and entered his dwelling.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:1.4 -->

Soon after the Buddha left, those mendicants considered,

<!-- @segment sn35.116:1.5 -->

“The Buddha gave this brief summary recital, then entered his dwelling without explaining the meaning in detail. …

<!-- @segment sn35.116:1.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:1.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:1.8 -->

Who can explain in detail the meaning of this brief summary recital given by the Buddha?”

<!-- @segment sn35.116:2.1 -->

Then those mendicants thought,

<!-- @segment sn35.116:2.2 -->

“This Venerable Ānanda is praised by the Buddha and esteemed by his sensible spiritual companions.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:2.3 -->

He is capable of explaining in detail the meaning of this brief summary recital given by the Buddha.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:2.4 -->

Let’s go to him, and ask him about this matter.”

<!-- @segment sn35.116:3.1 -->

Then those mendicants went to Ānanda and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:3.2 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side. They told him what had happened, and said,

<!-- @segment sn35.116:4.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:4.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:4.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:4.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:4.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:4.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:4.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:4.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:4.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:4.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:4.11 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:4.12 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:4.13 -->

“May Venerable Ānanda please explain this.”

<!-- @segment sn35.116:5.1 -->

“Reverends, suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. And while wandering in search of heartwood he’d come across a large tree standing with heartwood. But he’d pass over the roots and trunk, imagining that the heartwood should be sought in the branches and leaves.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:5.2 -->

Such is the consequence for the venerables. Though you were face to face with the Buddha, you bypassed him, imagining that you should ask me about this matter.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:5.3 -->

For he is the Buddha, the one who knows and sees. He is vision, he is knowledge, he is the manifestation of principle, he is the manifestation of divinity. He is the teacher, the proclaimer, the elucidator of meaning, the bestower of freedom from death, the lord of truth, the Realized One.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:5.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:5.5 -->

That was the time to approach the Buddha and ask about this matter.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:5.6 -->

You should have remembered it in line with the Buddha’s answer.”

<!-- @segment sn35.116:6.1 -->

“Certainly he is the Buddha, the one who knows and sees. He is vision, he is knowledge, he is the manifestation of principle, he is the manifestation of divinity. He is the teacher, the proclaimer, the elucidator of meaning, the bestower of freedom from death, the lord of truth, the Realized One.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:6.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:6.3 -->

That was the time to approach the Buddha and ask about this matter.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:6.4 -->

We should have remembered it in line with the Buddha’s answer.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:6.5 -->

Still, Venerable Ānanda is praised by the Buddha and esteemed by his sensible spiritual companions.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:6.6 -->

You are capable of explaining in detail the meaning of this brief summary recital given by the Buddha.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:6.7 -->

Please explain this, if it’s no trouble.”

<!-- @segment sn35.116:7.1 -->

“Then listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment sn35.116:7.2 -->

“Yes, reverend,” they replied.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:7.3 -->

Ānanda said this:

<!-- @segment sn35.116:8.1 -->

“Reverends, the Buddha gave this brief summary recital, then entered his dwelling without explaining the meaning in detail:

<!-- @segment sn35.116:8.2 -->

‘Mendicants, I say it’s not possible to know or see or reach the end of the world by traveling.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:8.3 -->

But I also say there’s no making an end of suffering without reaching the end of the world.’

<!-- @segment sn35.116:8.4 -->

This is how I understand the detailed meaning of this summary recital.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:8.5 -->

Whatever in the world through which you perceive the world and conceive the world

<!-- @segment sn35.116:8.6 -->

is called the world in the training of the Noble One.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:8.7 -->

And through what in the world do you perceive the world and conceive the world?

<!-- @segment sn35.116:8.8 -->

Through the eye in the world you perceive the world and conceive the world.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:8.9 -->

Through the ear …

<!-- @segment sn35.116:8.10 -->

nose …

<!-- @segment sn35.116:8.11 -->

tongue …

<!-- @segment sn35.116:8.12 -->

body …

<!-- @segment sn35.116:8.13 -->

mind in the world you perceive the world and conceive the world.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:8.14 -->

Whatever in the world through which you perceive the world and conceive the world

<!-- @segment sn35.116:8.15 -->

is called the world in the training of the Noble One.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:8.16 -->

When the Buddha gave this brief summary recital, then entered his dwelling without explaining the meaning in detail:

<!-- @segment sn35.116:8.17 -->

‘Mendicants, I say it’s not possible to know or see or reach the end of the world by traveling.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:8.18 -->

But I also say there’s no making an end of suffering without reaching the end of the world.’

<!-- @segment sn35.116:8.19 -->

That is how I understand the detailed meaning of this summary.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:8.20 -->

If you wish, you may go to the Buddha and ask him about this.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:8.21 -->

You should remember it in line with the Buddha’s answer.”

<!-- @segment sn35.116:9.1 -->

“Yes, reverend,” replied those mendicants. Then they rose from their seats and went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:10.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:10.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:10.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:10.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:10.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:10.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:10.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:10.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:10.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:10.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:10.11 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:10.12 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:10.13 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.116:10.14 -->

Then they said, “And Ānanda explained the meaning to us in this manner, with these words and phrases.”

<!-- @segment sn35.116:11.1 -->

“Mendicants, Ānanda is astute, he has great wisdom.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:11.2 -->

If you came to me and asked this question, I would answer it in exactly the same way as Ānanda.

<!-- @segment sn35.116:11.3 -->

That is what it means, and that’s how you should remember it.”
