---
slug: sn35.247
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Simile of Six Animals
---

<!-- @segment sn35.247:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, suppose a person with wounded and festering limbs was to enter a thicket of reeds.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:1.2 -->

The kusa thorns would pierce their feet, and the reed leaves would scratch their limbs.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:1.3 -->

And that would cause that person to experience even more pain and distress.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:1.4 -->

In the same way, some mendicant goes to a village or a wilderness and gets scolded,

<!-- @segment sn35.247:1.5 -->

‘This venerable, acting like this, behaving like this, is a filthy village thorn.’

<!-- @segment sn35.247:1.6 -->

Understanding that they’re a thorn, they should understand restraint and lack of restraint.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:2.1 -->

And how is someone unrestrained?

<!-- @segment sn35.247:2.2 -->

Take a mendicant who sees a sight with their eyes. If it’s pleasant they hold on to it, but if it’s unpleasant they dislike it. They live with mindfulness of the body unestablished and their heart stunted.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:2.3 -->

And they don’t truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without remainder.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:2.4 -->

When they hear a sound with their ears …

<!-- @segment sn35.247:2.5 -->

When they smell an odor with their nose …

<!-- @segment sn35.247:2.6 -->

When they taste a flavor with their tongue …

<!-- @segment sn35.247:2.7 -->

When they feel a touch with their body …

<!-- @segment sn35.247:2.8 -->

When they know an idea with their mind, if it’s pleasant they hold on to it, but if it’s unpleasant they dislike it. They live with mindfulness of the body unestablished and their heart stunted.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:2.9 -->

And they don’t truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without remainder.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:3.1 -->

Suppose a person was to catch six animals, with diverse territories and feeding grounds, and tie them up with a strong rope.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:3.2 -->

They’d catch a snake,

<!-- @segment sn35.247:3.3 -->

a dolphin,

<!-- @segment sn35.247:3.4 -->

a bird,

<!-- @segment sn35.247:3.5 -->

a dog,

<!-- @segment sn35.247:3.6 -->

a jackal,

<!-- @segment sn35.247:3.7 -->

and a monkey,

<!-- @segment sn35.247:3.8 -->

tie each up with a strong rope, then tie a knot in the middle and let them loose.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:3.9 -->

Then those six animals with different domains and ranges would each pull towards their own domain and range.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:3.10 -->

The snake would pull one way, thinking ‘I’m going into a termite mound!’ The dolphin would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the water!’ The bird would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m flying into the atmosphere!’ The dog would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the village!’ The jackal would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the charnel ground!’ The monkey would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the jungle!’

<!-- @segment sn35.247:3.11 -->

When those six animals became exhausted and worn out, the strongest of them would get their way, and they’d all have to submit to their control.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:3.12 -->

In the same way, when a mendicant has not developed or cultivated mindfulness of the body, their eye pulls towards pleasant sights, but is put off by unpleasant sights. Their ear … nose … tongue … body …

<!-- @segment sn35.247:3.13 -->

mind pulls towards pleasant ideas, but is put off by unpleasant ideas.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:3.14 -->

This is how someone is unrestrained.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:4.1 -->

And how is someone restrained?

<!-- @segment sn35.247:4.2 -->

Take a mendicant who sees a sight with their eyes. If it’s pleasant they don’t hold on to it, and if it’s unpleasant they don’t dislike it. They live with mindfulness of the body established and a limitless heart.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:4.3 -->

And they truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without remainder.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:4.4 -->

They hear a sound … smell an odor … taste a flavor … feel a touch …

<!-- @segment sn35.247:4.5 -->

know an idea with their mind. If it’s pleasant they don’t hold on to it, and if it’s unpleasant they don’t dislike it. They live with mindfulness of the body established and a limitless heart.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:4.6 -->

And they truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without remainder.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:5.1 -->

Suppose a person was to catch six animals, with diverse territories and feeding grounds, and tie them up with a strong rope.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:5.2 -->

They’d catch a snake,

<!-- @segment sn35.247:5.3 -->

a dolphin,

<!-- @segment sn35.247:5.4 -->

a bird,

<!-- @segment sn35.247:5.5 -->

a dog,

<!-- @segment sn35.247:5.6 -->

a jackal,

<!-- @segment sn35.247:5.7 -->

and a monkey,

<!-- @segment sn35.247:5.8 -->

tie each up with a strong rope, then tether them to a strong post or pillar.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:5.9 -->

Then those six animals with different domains and ranges would each pull towards their own domain and range.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:5.10 -->

The snake would pull one way, thinking ‘I’m going into a termite mound!’ The dolphin would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the water!’ The bird would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m flying into the atmosphere!’ The dog would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the village!’ The jackal would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the charnel ground!’ The monkey would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the jungle!’

<!-- @segment sn35.247:5.11 -->

When those six animals became exhausted and worn out, they’d stand or sit or lie down right by that post or pillar.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:5.12 -->

In the same way, when a mendicant has developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body, their eye doesn’t pull towards pleasant sights, and isn’t put off by unpleasant sights. Their ear … nose … tongue … body …

<!-- @segment sn35.247:5.13 -->

mind doesn’t pull towards pleasant ideas, and isn’t put off by unpleasant ideas.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:5.14 -->

This is how someone is restrained.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:6.1 -->

‘A strong post or pillar’ is a term for mindfulness of the body.

<!-- @segment sn35.247:6.2 -->

So you should train like this:

<!-- @segment sn35.247:6.3 -->

‘We will develop mindfulness of the body. We’ll cultivate it, make it our vehicle and our basis, keep it up, consolidate it, and properly implement it.’

<!-- @segment sn35.247:6.4 -->

That’s how you should train.”
