---
slug: sn35.60
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Complete Understanding of All Grasping
---

<!-- @segment sn35.60:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, I will teach you the principle for the complete understanding of all grasping.

<!-- @segment sn35.60:1.2 -->

Listen …

<!-- @segment sn35.60:1.3 -->

And what is the principle for the complete understanding of all grasping?

<!-- @segment sn35.60:1.4 -->

Eye consciousness arises dependent on the eye and sights. The meeting of the three is contact.

<!-- @segment sn35.60:1.5 -->

Contact is a requirement for feeling.

<!-- @segment sn35.60:1.6 -->

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye, sights, eye consciousness, eye contact, and feeling.

<!-- @segment sn35.60:1.7 -->

Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they are liberated, they understand: ‘I have completely understood grasping.’

<!-- @segment sn35.60:1.8 -->

Ear consciousness arises dependent on the ear and sounds. …

<!-- @segment sn35.60:1.9 -->

Nose consciousness arises dependent on the nose and smells. …

<!-- @segment sn35.60:1.10 -->

Tongue consciousness arises dependent on the tongue and tastes. …

<!-- @segment sn35.60:1.11 -->

Body consciousness arises dependent on the body and touches. …

<!-- @segment sn35.60:1.12 -->

Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and ideas. The meeting of the three is contact.

<!-- @segment sn35.60:1.13 -->

Contact is a requirement for feeling.

<!-- @segment sn35.60:1.14 -->

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the mind, ideas, mind consciousness, mind contact, and feeling.

<!-- @segment sn35.60:1.15 -->

Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they are liberated, they understand: ‘I have completely understood grasping.’

<!-- @segment sn35.60:1.16 -->

This is the principle for the complete understanding of all grasping.”
