---
slug: sn35.234
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Udāyī
---

<!-- @segment sn35.234:1.1 -->

At one time the venerables Ānanda and Udāyī were staying near Kosambī, in Ghosita’s Monastery.

<!-- @segment sn35.234:1.2 -->

Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Udāyī came out of retreat, went to Venerable Ānanda, and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment sn35.234:1.3 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to Ānanda:

<!-- @segment sn35.234:2.1 -->

“Reverend Ānanda, the Buddha has explained, opened, and illuminated in many ways how this body is not-self.

<!-- @segment sn35.234:2.2 -->

Is it possible to explain consciousness in the same way? To teach, assert, establish, clarify, analyze, and reveal how consciousness is not-self?”

<!-- @segment sn35.234:3.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.234:3.2 -->

“It is possible, Reverend Udāyī.

<!-- @segment sn35.234:4.1 -->

Does eye consciousness arise dependent on the eye and sights?”

<!-- @segment sn35.234:4.2 -->

“Yes, reverend.”

<!-- @segment sn35.234:4.3 -->

“If the cause and reason that gives rise to eye consciousness were to totally and utterly cease without remainder, would eye consciousness still be found?”

<!-- @segment sn35.234:4.4 -->

“No, reverend.”

<!-- @segment sn35.234:4.5 -->

“In this way, too, it can be understood how consciousness is not-self.

<!-- @segment sn35.234:5.1 -->

Does ear … nose … tongue … body …

<!-- @segment sn35.234:5.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.234:5.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.234:5.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.234:5.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.234:6.1 -->

mind consciousness arise dependent on the mind and ideas?”

<!-- @segment sn35.234:6.2 -->

“Yes, reverend.”

<!-- @segment sn35.234:6.3 -->

“If the cause and reason that gives rise to mind consciousness were to totally and utterly cease without remainder, would mind consciousness still be found?”

<!-- @segment sn35.234:6.4 -->

“No, reverend.”

<!-- @segment sn35.234:6.5 -->

“In this way, too, it can be understood how consciousness is not-self.

<!-- @segment sn35.234:7.1 -->

Suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. Wandering in search of heartwood, they’d take a sharp axe and enter a forest. There they’d see a big banana trunk, straight and young and grown unskewed. They’d cut it down at the base, cut off the root, cut off the top, and unroll the coiled sheaths. But they wouldn’t even find sapwood, much less heartwood.

<!-- @segment sn35.234:7.2 -->

In the same way, a mendicant sees these six fields of contact as neither self nor belonging to self.

<!-- @segment sn35.234:7.3 -->

So seeing, they don’t grasp anything in the world.

<!-- @segment sn35.234:7.4 -->

Not grasping, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished.

<!-- @segment sn35.234:7.5 -->

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’”
