---
slug: sn35.246
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Simile of the Harp
---

<!-- @segment sn35.246:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, any monk or nun who has desire or greed or hate or delusion or aversion come up for sights known by the eye should shield their mind from them:

<!-- @segment sn35.246:1.2 -->

‘This path is dangerous and perilous, thorny and tangled; it’s a wrong turn, a bad path, in poor condition.

<!-- @segment sn35.246:1.3 -->

This path is frequented by untrue persons, not by true persons.

<!-- @segment sn35.246:1.4 -->

It’s not worthy of you.’

<!-- @segment sn35.246:1.5 -->

The mind should be shielded from this when it comes to sights known by the eye.

<!-- @segment sn35.246:1.6 -->

Any monk or nun who has desire or greed or hate or delusion or repulsion come up for sounds … smells … tastes … touches …

<!-- @segment sn35.246:1.7 -->

ideas known by the mind should shield their mind against them:

<!-- @segment sn35.246:1.8 -->

‘This path is dangerous and perilous, thorny and tangled; it’s a wrong turn, a bad path, a sorry state.

<!-- @segment sn35.246:1.9 -->

This path is frequented by untrue persons, not by true persons.

<!-- @segment sn35.246:1.10 -->

It’s not worthy of you.’

<!-- @segment sn35.246:1.11 -->

The mind should be shielded from this when it comes to ideas known by the mind.

<!-- @segment sn35.246:2.1 -->

Suppose the crops have ripened,

<!-- @segment sn35.246:2.2 -->

but the caretaker is negligent. If an ox fond of crops invades the crops they’d indulge themselves as much as they like.

<!-- @segment sn35.246:2.3 -->

In the same way, when an unlearned ordinary person doesn’t exercise restraint when it comes to the six fields of contact, they indulge themselves in the five kinds of sensual stimulation as much as they like.

<!-- @segment sn35.246:3.1 -->

Suppose the crops have ripened, and the caretaker is diligent. If an ox fond of crops invades the crops

<!-- @segment sn35.246:3.2 -->

the caretaker would grab them firmly by the muzzle.

<!-- @segment sn35.246:3.3 -->

Then they’d grab them above the hump and hold them fast there.

<!-- @segment sn35.246:3.4 -->

Then they’d give them a good thrashing

<!-- @segment sn35.246:3.5 -->

before driving them away.

<!-- @segment sn35.246:3.6 -->

For a second time,

<!-- @segment sn35.246:3.7 -->

and even a third time, the same thing might happen.

<!-- @segment sn35.246:3.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.246:3.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.246:3.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.246:3.11 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.246:3.12 -->

As a result, no matter how often they might stand or sit in a village or wilderness, that ox fond of crops would never invade that crop again,

<!-- @segment sn35.246:3.13 -->

remembering the beating they got earlier.

<!-- @segment sn35.246:3.14 -->

In the same way, when a mendicant’s mind is straightened up, well straightened up when it comes to the six fields of contact, becomes stilled internally; it settles, unifies, and becomes immersed in samādhi.

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.1 -->

Suppose a king or their chief minister had never heard the sound of an arched harp.

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.2 -->

When he first hears the sound,

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.3 -->

he’d say,

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.4 -->

‘Oh my, what is making this sound, so arousing, sensuous, intoxicating, infatuating, and captivating?’

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.5 -->

They’d say to him,

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.6 -->

‘That, sir, is an arched harp.’

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.7 -->

He’d say,

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.8 -->

‘Go, mister, fetch me that arched harp.’

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.9 -->

So they’d fetch it

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.10 -->

and say,

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.11 -->

‘This, sir, is that arched harp.’

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.12 -->

He’d say,

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.13 -->

‘I’ve had enough of that arched harp! Just fetch me the sound.’

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.14 -->

They’d say,

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.15 -->

‘Sir, this arched harp is made of many components assembled together,

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.16 -->

which make a sound when they’re played. That is,

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.17 -->

it depends on the soundbox, the leather resonator, the neck, the tuning cords, the strings, the plectrum, and a person to play it properly. That’s how an arched harp is made of many components assembled together,

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.18 -->

which make a sound when they’re played.’

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.19 -->

But he’d split that harp into ten pieces or a hundred pieces, then splinter it up.

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.20 -->

He’d burn the splinters with fire, and reduce them to ashes.

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.21 -->

Then he’d whisk away the ashes in a strong wind, or glide them down a swift stream.

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.22 -->

Then he’d say,

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.23 -->

‘It seems that there’s nothing to this thing called an arched harp or whatever’s called an arched harp! But people waste their time with it, negligent and heedless!’

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.24 -->

In the same way, a mendicant searches for form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness anywhere they might be reborn.

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.25 -->

As they search in this way,

<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.26 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.27 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.28 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.246:4.29 -->

their ideas of ‘I’ or ‘mine’ or ‘I am’ are no more.”
