---
slug: sn35.240
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Simile of the Tortoise
---

<!-- @segment sn35.240:1.1 -->

“Once upon a time, mendicants, a tortoise was grazing along the bank of a river in the afternoon.

<!-- @segment sn35.240:1.2 -->

At the same time, a jackal was also hunting along the river bank.

<!-- @segment sn35.240:1.3 -->

The tortoise saw the jackal off in the distance hunting,

<!-- @segment sn35.240:1.4 -->

so it drew its limbs and neck inside its shell, and kept passive and silent.

<!-- @segment sn35.240:1.5 -->

But the jackal also saw the tortoise off in the distance grazing.

<!-- @segment sn35.240:1.6 -->

So it went up to the tortoise and waited nearby, thinking,

<!-- @segment sn35.240:1.7 -->

‘When that tortoise sticks one or other of its limbs or neck out from its shell, I’ll grab it right there, rip it out, and eat it!’

<!-- @segment sn35.240:1.8 -->

But when that tortoise didn’t stick one or other of its limbs or neck out from its shell, the jackal left disappointed, since it couldn’t find a vulnerability.

<!-- @segment sn35.240:2.1 -->

In the same way, Māra the Wicked is always waiting nearby, thinking:

<!-- @segment sn35.240:2.2 -->

‘Hopefully I can find a vulnerability in the eye,

<!-- @segment sn35.240:2.3 -->

ear, nose, tongue, body, or

<!-- @segment sn35.240:2.4 -->

mind.’

<!-- @segment sn35.240:2.5 -->

That’s why you should live with sense doors guarded.

<!-- @segment sn35.240:2.6 -->

When you see a sight with your eyes, don’t get caught up in the features and details.

<!-- @segment sn35.240:2.7 -->

If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint.

<!-- @segment sn35.240:2.8 -->

When you hear a sound with your ears …

<!-- @segment sn35.240:2.9 -->

When you smell an odor with your nose …

<!-- @segment sn35.240:2.10 -->

When you taste a flavor with your tongue …

<!-- @segment sn35.240:2.11 -->

When you feel a touch with your body …

<!-- @segment sn35.240:2.12 -->

When you know an idea with your mind, don’t get caught up in the features and details.

<!-- @segment sn35.240:2.13 -->

If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint.

<!-- @segment sn35.240:2.14 -->

When you live with your sense doors guarded, Māra will leave you disappointed, since he can’t find a vulnerability,

<!-- @segment sn35.240:2.15 -->

just like the jackal left the tortoise.

<!-- @segment sn35.240:3.1 -->

A mendicant should collect their thoughts

<!-- @segment sn35.240:3.2 -->

as a tortoise draws its limbs into its shell.

<!-- @segment sn35.240:3.3 -->

Independent, not disturbing others,

<!-- @segment sn35.240:3.4 -->

quenched: they wouldn’t blame anyone.”
