---
slug: sn35.87
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Channa
---

<!-- @segment sn35.87:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:1.2 -->

Now at that time the venerables Sāriputta, Mahācunda, and Channa were staying on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:1.3 -->

Now at that time Venerable Channa was sick, suffering, gravely ill.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:1.4 -->

Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Sāriputta came out of retreat, went to Venerable Mahācunda and said to him,

<!-- @segment sn35.87:1.5 -->

“Come, Reverend Cunda, let’s go to see Venerable Channa and ask about his illness.”

<!-- @segment sn35.87:1.6 -->

“Yes, reverend,” replied Mahācunda.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:2.1 -->

And then Sāriputta and Mahācunda went to see Channa and sat down on the seats spread out. Sāriputta said to Channa:

<!-- @segment sn35.87:2.2 -->

“I hope you’re keeping well, Reverend Channa; I hope you’re all right. I hope that your pain is fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not its growing.”

<!-- @segment sn35.87:3.1 -->

“Reverend Sāriputta, I’m not keeping well, I’m not getting by. The pain is terrible and growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its fading.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:3.2 -->

The winds piercing my head are so severe, it feels like a strong man drilling into my head with a sharp point.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:3.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.87:3.4 -->

The pain in my head is so severe, it feels like a strong man tightening a strong leather strap around my head.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:3.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.87:3.6 -->

The winds slicing my belly are so severe, like a deft butcher or their apprentice were slicing open a cows’s belly with a sharp meat cleaver.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:3.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.87:3.8 -->

The burning in my body is so severe, it feels like two strong men grabbing a weaker man by the arms to burn and scorch him on a pit of glowing coals.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:3.9 -->

I’m not keeping well, I’m not getting by. The pain is terrible and growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its fading.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:3.10 -->

Reverend Sāriputta, I shall commit suicide. I don’t wish to live.”

<!-- @segment sn35.87:4.1 -->

“Please don’t commit suicide!

<!-- @segment sn35.87:4.2 -->

Venerable Channa, keep going! We want you to keep going.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:4.3 -->

If you don’t have any suitable food, we’ll find it for you.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:4.4 -->

If you don’t have suitable medicine, we’ll find it for you.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:4.5 -->

If you don’t have a capable carer, we’ll find one for you.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:4.6 -->

Please don’t commit suicide!

<!-- @segment sn35.87:4.7 -->

Venerable Channa, keep going! We want you to keep going.”

<!-- @segment sn35.87:5.1 -->

“Reverend Sāriputta, it’s not that I don’t have suitable food;

<!-- @segment sn35.87:5.2 -->

I do have suitable food.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:5.3 -->

It’s not that I don’t have suitable medicine;

<!-- @segment sn35.87:5.4 -->

I do have suitable medicine.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:5.5 -->

It’s not that I don’t have a capable carer;

<!-- @segment sn35.87:5.6 -->

I do have a capable carer.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:5.7 -->

Moreover, for a long time now I have served the Teacher with love, not without love.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:5.8 -->

For it is proper for a disciple to serve the Teacher with love, not without love.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:5.9 -->

You should remember this: ‘The mendicant Channa will commit suicide blamelessly.’”

<!-- @segment sn35.87:6.1 -->

“I’d like to ask Venerable Channa about a certain point, if you’d take the time to answer.”

<!-- @segment sn35.87:6.2 -->

“Ask, Reverend Sāriputta. When I’ve heard it I’ll know.”

<!-- @segment sn35.87:7.1 -->

“Reverend Channa, do you regard the eye, eye consciousness, and things knowable by eye consciousness in this way: ‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?

<!-- @segment sn35.87:7.2 -->

Do you regard the ear … nose … tongue … body …

<!-- @segment sn35.87:7.3 -->

mind, mind consciousness, and things knowable by mind consciousness in this way: ‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”

<!-- @segment sn35.87:8.1 -->

“Reverend Sāriputta, I regard the eye, eye consciousness, and things knowable by eye consciousness in this way: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’

<!-- @segment sn35.87:8.2 -->

I regard the ear … nose … tongue … body …

<!-- @segment sn35.87:8.3 -->

mind, mind consciousness, and things knowable by mind consciousness in this way: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self’.”

<!-- @segment sn35.87:9.1 -->

“Reverend Channa, what have you seen, what have you directly known in these things that you regard them in this way: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self’?”

<!-- @segment sn35.87:9.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.87:9.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.87:10.1 -->

“Reverend Sāriputta, after seeing cessation, after directly knowing cessation in these things I regard them in this way: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self’.”

<!-- @segment sn35.87:10.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.87:10.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.87:11.1 -->

When he said this, Venerable Mahācunda said to Venerable Channa,

<!-- @segment sn35.87:11.2 -->

“So, Reverend Channa, you should regularly apply your mind well to this instruction of the Buddha:

<!-- @segment sn35.87:11.3 -->

‘For the dependent there is agitation. For the independent there’s no agitation.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:11.4 -->

When there’s no agitation there is tranquility.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:11.5 -->

When there’s tranquility there’s no inclination.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:11.6 -->

When there’s no inclination, there’s no coming and going.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:11.7 -->

When there’s no coming and going, there’s no passing away and reappearing.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:11.8 -->

When there’s no passing away and reappearing, there’s no this life or the next or between the two.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:11.9 -->

Just this is the end of suffering.’”

<!-- @segment sn35.87:12.1 -->

And when the venerables Sāriputta and Mahācunda had given Venerable Channa this advice they rose from their seat and left.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:12.2 -->

Not long after those venerables had left, Venerable Channa committed suicide.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:13.1 -->

Then Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment sn35.87:13.2 -->

“Sir, Venerable Channa has committed suicide.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:13.3 -->

Where has he been reborn in his next life?”

<!-- @segment sn35.87:13.4 -->

“Sāriputta, didn’t the mendicant Channa declare his blamelessness to you personally?”

<!-- @segment sn35.87:13.5 -->

“Sir, there is a Vajjian village named Pubbajira.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:13.6 -->

There Channa had families who were friendly, intimate, and hospitable.”

<!-- @segment sn35.87:13.7 -->

“The mendicant Channa did indeed have such families, Sāriputta.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:13.8 -->

But this is not enough for me to call someone ‘blameworthy’.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:13.9 -->

When someone lays down this body and takes up another body, I call them ‘blameworthy’.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:13.10 -->

But the mendicant Channa did no such thing.

<!-- @segment sn35.87:13.11 -->

You should remember this: ‘The mendicant Channa committed suicide blamelessly.’”

<!-- @segment sn35.87:13.12 -->
