---
slug: sn35.248
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Sheaf of Barley
---

<!-- @segment sn35.248:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, suppose a sheaf of barley was placed at a crossroads.

<!-- @segment sn35.248:1.2 -->

Then six people would come along carrying flails,

<!-- @segment sn35.248:1.3 -->

and start threshing the sheaf of barley.

<!-- @segment sn35.248:1.4 -->

So that sheaf of barley would be thoroughly threshed by those six flails.

<!-- @segment sn35.248:1.5 -->

Then a seventh individual would come along carrying a flail,

<!-- @segment sn35.248:1.6 -->

and they’d give the sheaf of barley a seventh threshing.

<!-- @segment sn35.248:1.7 -->

So that sheaf of barley would be even more thoroughly threshed by that seventh flail.

<!-- @segment sn35.248:1.8 -->

In the same way, an unlearned ordinary person is struck in the eye by both pleasant and unpleasant sights.

<!-- @segment sn35.248:1.9 -->

They’re struck in the ear … nose … tongue … body …

<!-- @segment sn35.248:1.10 -->

mind by both pleasant and unpleasant ideas.

<!-- @segment sn35.248:1.11 -->

And if that unlearned ordinary person intends to be reborn in a new state of existence in the future, that futile person is even more thoroughly struck, like that sheaf of barley threshed by the seventh person.

<!-- @segment sn35.248:2.1 -->

Once upon a time, a battle was fought between the gods and the titans.

<!-- @segment sn35.248:2.2 -->

Then Vepacitti, lord of titans, addressed the titans,

<!-- @segment sn35.248:2.3 -->

‘My good fellows, if the titans defeat the gods in this battle, bind Sakka, the lord of gods, by his limbs and neck and bring him to my presence in the citadel of the titans.’

<!-- @segment sn35.248:2.4 -->

Meanwhile, Sakka, lord of gods, addressed the gods of the thirty-three,

<!-- @segment sn35.248:2.5 -->

‘My good fellows, if the gods defeat the titans in this battle, bind Vepacitti by his limbs and neck and bring him to my presence in the Hall of Clear Right of the gods.’

<!-- @segment sn35.248:2.6 -->

In that battle the gods won and the titans lost.

<!-- @segment sn35.248:2.7 -->

So the gods of the thirty-three bound Vepacitti by his limbs and neck and brought him to Sakka’s presence in the Hall of Clear Right of the gods.

<!-- @segment sn35.248:2.8 -->

And there Vepacitti remained bound by his limbs and neck.

<!-- @segment sn35.248:2.9 -->

That is, until he thought,

<!-- @segment sn35.248:2.10 -->

‘It’s the gods who are principled, while the titans are unprincipled. Now I belong right here in the castle of the gods.’

<!-- @segment sn35.248:2.11 -->

Then he found himself freed from the bonds on his limbs and neck. He entertained himself, supplied and provided with the five kinds of heavenly sensual stimulation.

<!-- @segment sn35.248:2.12 -->

But when he thought,

<!-- @segment sn35.248:2.13 -->

‘It’s the titans who are principled, while the gods are unprincipled. Now I will go over there to the citadel of the titans,’

<!-- @segment sn35.248:2.14 -->

he found himself bound by his limbs and neck, and the five kinds of heavenly sensual stimulation fell away.

<!-- @segment sn35.248:2.15 -->

That’s how subtly Vepacitti was bound.

<!-- @segment sn35.248:2.16 -->

But the bonds of Māra are even more subtle than that.

<!-- @segment sn35.248:2.17 -->

When you conceive, you’re bound by Māra. Not conceiving, you’re free from the Wicked One.

<!-- @segment sn35.248:3.1 -->

These are what is conceived: ‘I am’, ‘I am this’, ‘I will be’, ‘I will not be’, ‘I will have form’, ‘I will be formless’, ‘I will be percipient’, ‘I will be non-percipient’, ‘I will be neither percipient nor non-percipient.’

<!-- @segment sn35.248:3.2 -->

What is conceived is a disease, a boil, a dart.

<!-- @segment sn35.248:3.3 -->

So mendicants, you should train yourselves like this: ‘We will live with a heart that does not conceive.’

<!-- @segment sn35.248:3.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.248:4.1 -->

These are what is perturbed: ‘I am’, ‘I am this’, ‘I will be’, ‘I will not be’, ‘I will have form’, ‘I will be formless’, ‘I will be percipient’, ‘I will be non-percipient’, ‘I will be neither percipient nor non-percipient.’

<!-- @segment sn35.248:4.2 -->

What is perturbed is a disease, a boil, a dart.

<!-- @segment sn35.248:4.3 -->

So mendicants, you should train yourselves like this: ‘We will live with a heart free of perturbation.’

<!-- @segment sn35.248:4.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.248:5.1 -->

These are what is trembled: ‘I am’, ‘I am this’, ‘I will be’, ‘I will not be’, ‘I will have form’, ‘I will be formless’, ‘I will be percipient’, ‘I will be non-percipient’, ‘I will be neither percipient nor non-percipient.’

<!-- @segment sn35.248:5.2 -->

What is trembled is a disease, a boil, a dart.

<!-- @segment sn35.248:5.3 -->

So mendicants, you should train yourselves like this: ‘We will live with a heart free of trembling.’

<!-- @segment sn35.248:5.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.248:6.1 -->

These are what is proliferated: ‘I am’, ‘I am this’, ‘I will be’, ‘I will not be’, ‘I will have form’, ‘I will be formless’, ‘I will be percipient’, ‘I will be non-percipient’, ‘I will be neither percipient nor non-percipient.’

<!-- @segment sn35.248:6.2 -->

What is proliferated is a disease, a boil, a dart.

<!-- @segment sn35.248:6.3 -->

So mendicants, you should train yourselves like this: ‘We will live with a heart free of proliferation.’

<!-- @segment sn35.248:6.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.248:7.1 -->

These are states of conceit: ‘I am’, ‘I am this’, ‘I will be’, ‘I will not be’, ‘I will have form’, ‘I will be formless’, ‘I will be percipient’, ‘I will be non-percipient’, ‘I will be neither percipient nor non-percipient.’

<!-- @segment sn35.248:7.2 -->

The state of conceit is a disease, a boil, a dart.

<!-- @segment sn35.248:7.3 -->

So mendicants, you should train yourselves like this: ‘We will live with a heart that has struck down conceit.’”

<!-- @segment sn35.248:7.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.248:7.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.248:7.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.248:8.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.248:8.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.248:8.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.248:8.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.248:8.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.248:9.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.248:9.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.248:9.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.248:9.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn35.248:9.5 -->

The Linked Discourses on the six sense fields are complete.
