---
slug: sn35.130
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Hāliddikāni
description: The Buddha teaches on the six sense bases regarding with hāliddikāni, guiding disciples toward discernment of sense experience and release from clinging.
qualities: equanimity, wisdom
theme: story, wisdom
---

<!-- @segment sn35.130:1.1 -->

At one time Venerable Mahākaccāna was staying in the land of the Avantis near Kuraraghara on Steep Mountain.

<!-- @segment sn35.130:1.2 -->

Then the householder Hāliddikāni went up to Venerable Mahākaccāna … and asked him,

<!-- @segment sn35.130:1.3 -->

“Sir, this was said by the Buddha:

<!-- @segment sn35.130:1.4 -->

‘Diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of contacts, and diversity of contacts gives rise to diversity of feelings.’

<!-- @segment sn35.130:1.5 -->

How does diversity of elements give rise to diversity of contacts, and diversity of contacts gives rise to diversity of feelings?”

<!-- @segment sn35.130:1.6 -->

“Householder, it’s when a mendicant sees a sight with the eye and understands it to be agreeable.

<!-- @segment sn35.130:1.7 -->

There is eye consciousness; and pleasant feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as pleasant.

<!-- @segment sn35.130:1.8 -->

Then they see a sight and understand it to be disagreeable.

<!-- @segment sn35.130:1.9 -->

There is eye consciousness; and painful feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as painful.

<!-- @segment sn35.130:1.10 -->

Then they see a sight and understand it to be a basis for equanimity.

<!-- @segment sn35.130:1.11 -->

There is eye consciousness; and neutral feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as neutral.

<!-- @segment sn35.130:2.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant hears a sound with the ear …

<!-- @segment sn35.130:2.2 -->

smells an odor with the nose …

<!-- @segment sn35.130:2.3 -->

tastes a flavor with the tongue …

<!-- @segment sn35.130:2.4 -->

encounters a touch with the body …

<!-- @segment sn35.130:2.5 -->

knows an idea with the mind and understands it to be agreeable.

<!-- @segment sn35.130:2.6 -->

There is mind consciousness; and pleasant feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as pleasant.

<!-- @segment sn35.130:2.7 -->

Then they know an idea and understand it to be disagreeable.

<!-- @segment sn35.130:2.8 -->

There is mind consciousness; and painful feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as painful.

<!-- @segment sn35.130:2.9 -->

Then they know an idea and understand it to be a basis for equanimity.

<!-- @segment sn35.130:2.10 -->

Neutral feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as neutral.

<!-- @segment sn35.130:2.11 -->

That’s how diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of contacts, and diversity of contacts gives rise to diversity of feelings.”
