---
slug: sn35.94
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Untamed, Unguarded
---

<!-- @segment sn35.94:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn35.94:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, these six fields of contact bring suffering when they’re untamed, unguarded, unprotected, and unrestrained.

<!-- @segment sn35.94:1.3 -->

What six?

<!-- @segment sn35.94:1.4 -->

The field of eye contact brings suffering when it’s untamed, unguarded, unprotected, and unrestrained.

<!-- @segment sn35.94:1.5 -->

The field of ear contact … nose contact … tongue contact … body contact …

<!-- @segment sn35.94:1.6 -->

The field of mind contact brings suffering when it’s untamed, unguarded, unprotected, and unrestrained.

<!-- @segment sn35.94:1.7 -->

These six fields of contact bring suffering when they’re untamed, unguarded, unprotected, and unrestrained.

<!-- @segment sn35.94:2.1 -->

These six fields of contact bring happiness when they’re well tamed, well guarded, well protected, and well restrained.

<!-- @segment sn35.94:2.2 -->

What six?

<!-- @segment sn35.94:2.3 -->

The field of eye contact brings happiness when it’s well tamed, well guarded, well protected, and well restrained.

<!-- @segment sn35.94:2.4 -->

The field of ear contact … nose contact … tongue contact … body contact …

<!-- @segment sn35.94:2.5 -->

The field of mind contact brings happiness when it’s well tamed, well guarded, well protected, and well restrained.

<!-- @segment sn35.94:2.6 -->

These six fields of contact bring happiness when they’re well tamed, well guarded, well protected, and well restrained.”

<!-- @segment sn35.94:2.7 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment sn35.94:2.8 -->

Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

<!-- @segment sn35.94:3.1 -->

“Mendicants, it’s just the six fields of contact

<!-- @segment sn35.94:3.2 -->

that lead the unrestrained to suffering.

<!-- @segment sn35.94:3.3 -->

Those who understand how to restrain them

<!-- @segment sn35.94:3.4 -->

live with faith as partner, not festering.

<!-- @segment sn35.94:4.1 -->

When you’ve seen pleasant sights

<!-- @segment sn35.94:4.2 -->

and unpleasant ones, too,

<!-- @segment sn35.94:4.3 -->

get rid of all manner of desire for the pleasant,

<!-- @segment sn35.94:4.4 -->

without hating what you don’t like.

<!-- @segment sn35.94:5.1 -->

When you’ve heard sounds both liked and disliked,

<!-- @segment sn35.94:5.2 -->

don’t fall under the thrall of sounds you like,

<!-- @segment sn35.94:5.3 -->

get rid of hate for the unliked,

<!-- @segment sn35.94:5.4 -->

and don’t hurt your mind <j>by thinking of what you don’t like.

<!-- @segment sn35.94:6.1 -->

When you’ve smelled a pleasant, fragrant scent,

<!-- @segment sn35.94:6.2 -->

and one that’s foul and unpleasant,

<!-- @segment sn35.94:6.3 -->

get rid of aversion for the unpleasant,

<!-- @segment sn35.94:6.4 -->

while not yielding to desire for the pleasant.

<!-- @segment sn35.94:7.1 -->

When you’ve enjoyed a sweet, delicious taste,

<!-- @segment sn35.94:7.2 -->

and sometimes those that are bitter,

<!-- @segment sn35.94:7.3 -->

don’t be attached to enjoying sweet tastes,

<!-- @segment sn35.94:7.4 -->

and don’t despise the bitter.

<!-- @segment sn35.94:8.1 -->

Don’t be intoxicated by a pleasant touch,

<!-- @segment sn35.94:8.2 -->

and don’t tremble at a painful touch.

<!-- @segment sn35.94:8.3 -->

Look with equanimity at the duality <j>of pleasant and painful contacts,

<!-- @segment sn35.94:8.4 -->

without favoring or opposing anything.

<!-- @segment sn35.94:9.1 -->

People generally let their perceptions proliferate;

<!-- @segment sn35.94:9.2 -->

perceiving and proliferating, they are attracted.

<!-- @segment sn35.94:9.3 -->

Casting aside all mental constructions of the domestic life,

<!-- @segment sn35.94:9.4 -->

wander intent on renunciation.

<!-- @segment sn35.94:10.1 -->

When the mind is well developed like this <j>regarding the six,

<!-- @segment sn35.94:10.2 -->

it doesn’t waver at contacts at all.

<!-- @segment sn35.94:10.3 -->

Mendicants, those who have mastered greed and hate

<!-- @segment sn35.94:10.4 -->

go beyond birth and death.”
