---
slug: sn36.11
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: In Private
description: "The Buddha resolves a mendicant's question about how all feeling can be included in suffering, explaining that even pleasant and neutral feelings are impermanent, dependently arisen, and subject to change and destruction."
qualities: jhana, ending, delusion, greed, attachment, aversion
theme: wisdom, inquisitiveness
---

<!-- @segment sn36.11:1.1 -->

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

<!-- @segment sn36.11:1.2 -->

“Just now, sir, as I was in private retreat this thought came to mind.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:1.3 -->

The Buddha has spoken of three feelings.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:1.4 -->

Pleasant, painful, and neutral feeling.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:1.5 -->

These are the three feelings the Buddha has spoken of.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:1.6 -->

But the Buddha has also said:

<!-- @segment sn36.11:1.7 -->

‘Suffering includes whatever is felt.’

<!-- @segment sn36.11:1.8 -->

What was the Buddha referring to when he said this?”

<!-- @segment sn36.11:1.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.1 -->

“Good, good, mendicant!

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.2 -->

I have spoken of these three feelings.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.3 -->

Pleasant, painful, and neutral feeling.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.4 -->

These are the three feelings I have spoken of.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.5 -->

But I have also said:

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.6 -->

‘Suffering includes whatever is felt.’

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.7 -->

When I said this I was referring to the impermanence of conditions, to the fact that conditions are

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.9 -->

liable to end,

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.10 -->

vanish,

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.11 -->

fade away,

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.12 -->

cease,

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.13 -->

and perish.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.14 -->



<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.15 -->

But I have also explained the progressive cessation of activities.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.16 -->

For someone who has attained the first absorption, speech has ceased.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.17 -->

For someone who has attained the second absorption, the placing of the mind and keeping it connected have ceased.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.18 -->

For someone who has attained the third absorption, rapture has ceased.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.19 -->

For someone who has attained the fourth absorption, breathing has ceased.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.20 -->

For someone who has attained the dimension of infinite space, the perception of form has ceased.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.21 -->

For someone who has attained the dimension of infinite consciousness, the perception of the dimension of infinite space has ceased.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.22 -->

For someone who has attained the dimension of nothingness, the perception of the dimension of infinite consciousness has ceased.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.23 -->

For someone who has attained the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, the perception of the dimension of nothingness has ceased.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.24 -->

For someone who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling have ceased.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.25 -->

For a mendicant who has ended the defilements, greed, hate, and delusion have ceased.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.26 -->

And I have also explained the progressive settling of activities.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.27 -->

For someone who has attained the first absorption, speech has stilled.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.28 -->

For someone who has attained the second absorption, the placing of the mind and keeping it connected have stilled. …

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.29 -->

For someone who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling have stilled.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.30 -->

For a mendicant who has ended the defilements, greed, hate, and delusion have stilled.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.31 -->

There are these six levels of tranquility.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.32 -->

For someone who has attained the first absorption, speech has been tranquilized.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.33 -->

For someone who has attained the second absorption, the placing of the mind and keeping it connected have been tranquilized.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.34 -->

For someone who has attained the third absorption, rapture has been tranquilized.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.35 -->

For someone who has attained the fourth absorption, breathing has been tranquilized.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.36 -->

For someone who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling have been tranquilized.

<!-- @segment sn36.11:2.37 -->

For a mendicant who has ended the defilements, greed, hate, and delusion have been tranquilized.”
