---
slug: sn36.3
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Giving Up
---

<!-- @segment sn36.3:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, there are these three feelings.

<!-- @segment sn36.3:1.2 -->

What three?

<!-- @segment sn36.3:1.3 -->

Pleasant, painful, and neutral feeling.

<!-- @segment sn36.3:1.4 -->

The underlying tendency to greed should be given up when it comes to pleasant feeling. The underlying tendency to aversion should be given up when it comes to painful feeling. The underlying tendency to ignorance should be given up when it comes to neutral feeling.

<!-- @segment sn36.3:1.5 -->

When a mendicant has given up these underlying tendencies, they’re called a mendicant without underlying tendencies, who sees rightly, has cut off craving, cast off the fetters, and by rightly comprehending conceit has made an end of suffering.

<!-- @segment sn36.3:2.1 -->

When you feel pleasure

<!-- @segment sn36.3:2.2 -->

without understanding feeling,

<!-- @segment sn36.3:2.3 -->

the underlying tendency to greed is there,

<!-- @segment sn36.3:2.4 -->

if you don’t see the escape.

<!-- @segment sn36.3:3.1 -->

When you feel pain

<!-- @segment sn36.3:3.2 -->

without understanding feeling,

<!-- @segment sn36.3:3.3 -->

the underlying tendency to aversion is there,

<!-- @segment sn36.3:3.4 -->

if you don’t see the escape.

<!-- @segment sn36.3:4.1 -->

As for that peaceful, neutral feeling:

<!-- @segment sn36.3:4.2 -->

he of vast wisdom has taught

<!-- @segment sn36.3:4.3 -->

that if you relish it,

<!-- @segment sn36.3:4.4 -->

you’re still not released from suffering.

<!-- @segment sn36.3:5.1 -->

But when a mendicant is keen,

<!-- @segment sn36.3:5.2 -->

not neglecting situational awareness,

<!-- @segment sn36.3:5.3 -->

that astute person

<!-- @segment sn36.3:5.4 -->

understands all feelings.

<!-- @segment sn36.3:6.1 -->

Completely understanding feelings,

<!-- @segment sn36.3:6.2 -->

they’re without defilements in this very life.

<!-- @segment sn36.3:6.3 -->

That knowledge master is firm in principle;

<!-- @segment sn36.3:6.4 -->

when their body breaks up, they can’t be reckoned.”
