---
slug: sn36.20
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: A Mendicant
description: The Buddha explains that he has taught feelings in many ways—two, three, five, six, eighteen, thirty-six, or a hundred and eight—and that those who accept the well-spoken teaching live in harmony rather than dispute.
qualities: happiness, ending, harm, ill will
theme: wisdom, principle
---

<!-- @segment sn36.20:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, in one explanation I’ve spoken of two feelings. In another explanation I’ve spoken of three feelings, or five, six, eighteen, thirty-six, or a hundred and eight feelings.

<!-- @segment sn36.20:1.2 -->

I’ve taught the Dhamma with all these explanations.

<!-- @segment sn36.20:1.3 -->

This being so, you can expect that those who don’t concede, approve, or agree with what has been well spoken will fight, quarrel, and dispute, continually wounding each other with barbed words.

<!-- @segment sn36.20:1.4 -->

I’ve taught the Dhamma with all these explanations.

<!-- @segment sn36.20:1.5 -->

This being so, you can expect that those who do concede, approve, or agree with what has been well spoken will live in harmony, appreciating each other, without dispute, blending like milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes.

<!-- @segment sn36.20:2.1 -->

There are these five kinds of sensual stimulation. …

<!-- @segment sn36.20:2.2 -->

It’s possible that wanderers of other religions might say:

<!-- @segment sn36.20:2.3 -->

‘The ascetic Gotama spoke of the cessation of perception and feeling, and he includes it in happiness.

<!-- @segment sn36.20:2.4 -->

What’s up with that?’

<!-- @segment sn36.20:2.5 -->

Mendicants, when wanderers of other religions say this, you should say to them:

<!-- @segment sn36.20:2.6 -->

‘Reverends, when the Buddha describes what’s included in happiness, he’s not just referring to pleasant feeling.

<!-- @segment sn36.20:2.7 -->

The Realized One describes pleasure as included in happiness wherever it is found, and in whatever context.’”

<!-- @segment sn36.20:2.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn36.20:2.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn36.20:3.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn36.20:3.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn36.20:3.3 -->
