---
slug: sn36.6
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: An Arrow
---

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, an unlearned ordinary person feels pleasant, painful, and neutral feelings.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.2 -->

A learned noble disciple also feels pleasant, painful, and neutral feelings.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.3 -->

What, then, is the difference between a learned noble disciple and an ordinary unlearned person?”

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.4 -->

“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. …”

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.5 -->

“When an unlearned ordinary person experiences painful physical feelings they sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.6 -->

They experience two feelings:

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.7 -->

physical and mental.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.8 -->

It’s like a person who is struck with an arrow,

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.9 -->

only to be struck with a second arrow.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.10 -->

That person experiences the feeling of two arrows.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.11 -->

In the same way, when an unlearned ordinary person experiences painful physical feelings they sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.12 -->

They experience two feelings:

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.13 -->

physical and mental.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.14 -->

When they’re touched by painful feeling, they resist it.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.15 -->

The underlying tendency for aversion towards painful feeling underlies that.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.16 -->

When touched by painful feeling they look forward to enjoying sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.17 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.18 -->

Because an unlearned ordinary person doesn’t understand any escape from painful feeling apart from sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.19 -->

Since they look forward to enjoying sensual pleasures, the underlying tendency to greed for pleasant feeling underlies that.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.20 -->

They don’t truly understand feelings’ origin, disappearance, gratification, drawback, and escape.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.21 -->

The underlying tendency to ignorance about neutral feeling underlies that.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.22 -->

If they feel a pleasant feeling, they feel it attached.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.23 -->

If they feel a painful feeling, they feel it attached.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.24 -->

If they feel a neutral feeling, they feel it attached.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:1.25 -->

They’re called an unlearned ordinary person who is attached to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They are attached to suffering, I say.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:2.1 -->

When a learned noble disciple experiences painful physical feelings they don’t sorrow or wail or lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:2.2 -->

They experience one feeling:

<!-- @segment sn36.6:2.3 -->

physical, not mental.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:3.1 -->

It’s like a person who is struck with an arrow,

<!-- @segment sn36.6:3.2 -->

but was not struck with a second arrow.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:3.3 -->

That person would experience the feeling of one arrow.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:3.4 -->

In the same way, when a learned noble disciple experiences painful physical feelings they don’t sorrow or wail or lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:3.5 -->

They experience one feeling:

<!-- @segment sn36.6:3.6 -->

physical, not mental.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:3.7 -->

When they’re touched by painful feeling, they don’t resist it.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:3.8 -->

There’s no underlying tendency for aversion towards painful feeling underlying that.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:3.9 -->

When touched by painful feeling they don’t look forward to enjoying sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:3.10 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment sn36.6:3.11 -->

Because a learned noble disciple understands an escape from painful feeling apart from sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:3.12 -->

Since they don’t look forward to enjoying sensual pleasures, there’s no underlying tendency to greed for pleasant feeling underlying that.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:3.13 -->

They truly understand feelings’ origin, disappearance, gratification, drawback, and escape.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:3.14 -->

There’s no underlying tendency to ignorance about neutral feeling underlying that.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:3.15 -->

If they feel a pleasant feeling, they feel it detached.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:3.16 -->

If they feel a painful feeling, they feel it detached.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:3.17 -->

If they feel a neutral feeling, they feel it detached.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:3.18 -->

They’re called a learned noble disciple who is detached from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They are detached from suffering, I say.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:3.19 -->

This is the difference between a learned noble disciple and an unlearned ordinary person.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:4.1 -->

A wise and learned person does not not feel

<!-- @segment sn36.6:4.2 -->

the feeling of pleasure and pain.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:4.3 -->

This is the great difference of skill

<!-- @segment sn36.6:4.4 -->

between the wise one and the ordinary.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:5.1 -->

A learned person who has appraised the teaching

<!-- @segment sn36.6:5.2 -->

discerns this world and the next.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:5.3 -->

Desirable things don’t disturb their mind,

<!-- @segment sn36.6:5.4 -->

nor are they repelled by the undesirable.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:6.1 -->

Both favoring and opposing

<!-- @segment sn36.6:6.2 -->

are cleared and ended, and are no more.

<!-- @segment sn36.6:6.3 -->

Knowing the stainless, sorrowless state,

<!-- @segment sn36.6:6.4 -->

they who have gone beyond rebirth <j>understand rightly.”
