---
slug: sn36.8
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Infirmary (2nd)
description: "The Buddha teaches mendicants in the infirmary to await death mindful and aware, contemplating pleasant, painful, and neutral feelings as impermanent and dependent on the body until all feeling becomes cool at life's end."
qualities: greed, displeasure, jealousy, dispassion, ending, giving up
theme: wisdom, training guideline
---

<!-- @segment sn36.8:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

<!-- @segment sn36.8:1.2 -->

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to the infirmary, where he sat down on the seat spread out,

<!-- @segment sn36.8:1.3 -->

and addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment sn36.8:2.1 -->

“Mendicants, a mendicant should await their time mindful and aware.

<!-- @segment sn36.8:2.2 -->

This is my instruction to you.

<!-- @segment sn36.8:3.1 -->

And how is a mendicant mindful?

<!-- @segment sn36.8:3.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn36.8:3.3 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings …

<!-- @segment sn36.8:3.4 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of the mind …

<!-- @segment sn36.8:3.5 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn36.8:3.6 -->

That’s how a mendicant is mindful.

<!-- @segment sn36.8:4.1 -->

And how is a mendicant aware?

<!-- @segment sn36.8:4.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant acts with situational awareness when going out and coming back; when looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent.

<!-- @segment sn36.8:4.3 -->

That’s how a mendicant is aware.

<!-- @segment sn36.8:4.4 -->

A mendicant should await their time mindful and aware.

<!-- @segment sn36.8:4.5 -->

This is my instruction to you.

<!-- @segment sn36.8:5.1 -->

While a mendicant is meditating like this—mindful, aware, diligent, keen, and resolute—if pleasant feelings arise, they understand:

<!-- @segment sn36.8:5.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn36.8:5.3 -->

‘A pleasant feeling has arisen in me.

<!-- @segment sn36.8:5.4 -->

That’s dependent, not independent.

<!-- @segment sn36.8:5.5 -->

Dependent on what?

<!-- @segment sn36.8:5.6 -->

Dependent on this very contact.

<!-- @segment sn36.8:5.7 -->

But this contact is impermanent, conditioned, dependently originated.

<!-- @segment sn36.8:5.8 -->

So how could a pleasant feeling be permanent, since it has arisen dependent on contact that is impermanent, conditioned, and dependently originated?’

<!-- @segment sn36.8:5.9 -->

They meditate observing impermanence, vanishing, dispassion, cessation, and letting go in contact and pleasant feeling.

<!-- @segment sn36.8:5.10 -->

As they do so, they give up the underlying tendency for greed for contact and pleasant feeling.

<!-- @segment sn36.8:6.1 -->

While a mendicant is meditating like this—mindful, aware, diligent, keen, and resolute—if painful feelings arise …

<!-- @segment sn36.8:6.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn36.8:6.3 -->

if neutral feelings arise, they understand:

<!-- @segment sn36.8:6.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn36.8:6.5 -->

‘A neutral feeling has arisen in me.

<!-- @segment sn36.8:6.6 -->

That’s dependent, not independent.

<!-- @segment sn36.8:6.7 -->

Dependent on what?

<!-- @segment sn36.8:6.8 -->

Dependent on this very contact.’

<!-- @segment sn36.8:6.9 -->

(Tell in full as in the previous discourse.)

<!-- @segment sn36.8:6.10 -->

They understand: ‘When my body breaks up and my life is over, everything that’s felt, since I no longer take pleasure in it, will become cool right here.’

<!-- @segment sn36.8:7.1 -->

Suppose an oil lamp depended on oil and a wick to burn.

<!-- @segment sn36.8:7.2 -->

As the oil and the wick are used up, it would be extinguished due to not being fed.

<!-- @segment sn36.8:7.3 -->

In the same way, feeling the end of the body draw close, a mendicant understands: ‘I feel the end of the body draw close.’ Feeling the end of life draw close, they understand: ‘I feel the end of life draw close.’

<!-- @segment sn36.8:7.4 -->

They understand: ‘When my body breaks up and my life is over, everything that’s felt, since I no longer take pleasure in it, will become cool right here.’”
