---
slug: sn37.30
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: They Send Her Away
description: The Buddha teaches the five powers of a lady and shows that without ethical behavior a family sends her away, while ethical behavior alone ensures she is accommodated regardless of other powers.
qualities: ethical conduct, wisdom
theme: cultivating discernment, principle
---

<!-- @segment sn37.30:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, there are these five powers of a lady.

<!-- @segment sn37.30:1.2 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment sn37.30:1.3 -->

Attractiveness, wealth, relatives, children, and ethical behavior.

<!-- @segment sn37.30:1.4 -->

If a lady has the power of attractiveness but not that of ethical behavior, the family will send her away, they won’t accommodate her.

<!-- @segment sn37.30:1.5 -->

If a lady has the powers of attractiveness and wealth but not that of ethical behavior, the family will send her away, they won’t accommodate her.

<!-- @segment sn37.30:1.6 -->

If a lady has the powers of attractiveness, wealth, and relatives, but not that of ethical behavior, the family will send her away, they won’t accommodate her.

<!-- @segment sn37.30:1.7 -->

If a lady has the powers of attractiveness, wealth, relatives, and children, but not that of ethical behavior, the family will send her away, they won’t accommodate her.

<!-- @segment sn37.30:1.8 -->

If a lady has the power of ethical behavior but not that of attractiveness, the family will accommodate her, they won’t send her away.

<!-- @segment sn37.30:1.9 -->

If a lady has the power of ethical behavior but not that of wealth, the family will accommodate her, they won’t send her away.

<!-- @segment sn37.30:1.10 -->

If a lady has the power of ethical behavior but not that of relatives, the family will accommodate her, they won’t send her away.

<!-- @segment sn37.30:1.11 -->

If a lady has the power of ethical behavior but not that of children, the family will accommodate her, they won’t send her away.

<!-- @segment sn37.30:1.12 -->

These are the five powers of a lady.”
