---
slug: sn41.4
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Mahaka’s Demonstration
description: The householder Citta teaches on mahaka’s demonstration, showing the wisdom and direct knowledge of an exemplary lay follower.
qualities: psychic power, adventurousness, flexible
theme: wisdom, story
---

<!-- @segment sn41.4:1.1 -->

At one time several senior mendicants were staying near Macchikāsaṇḍa in the Wild Mango Grove.

<!-- @segment sn41.4:1.2 -->

Then Citta the householder went up to them, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to them,

<!-- @segment sn41.4:1.3 -->

“Sirs, would the senior monks please accept tomorrow’s meal from me in my milkshed?”

<!-- @segment sn41.4:1.4 -->

They consented with silence.

<!-- @segment sn41.4:1.5 -->

Then, knowing that the senior mendicants had consented, Citta rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled them, keeping them on his right, before leaving.

<!-- @segment sn41.4:1.6 -->

Then when the night had passed, the senior mendicants robed up in the morning and, taking their bowls and robes, went to Citta’s milkshed, and sat down on the seats spread out.

<!-- @segment sn41.4:2.1 -->

Then Citta served and satisfied the senior mendicants with his own hands with delicious milk-rice made with ghee.

<!-- @segment sn41.4:2.2 -->

When the senior mendicants had eaten and washed their hands and bowls, they rose from their seats and left.

<!-- @segment sn41.4:2.3 -->

Citta instructed that the leftovers of the food be distributed, then followed behind the senior mendicants.

<!-- @segment sn41.4:2.4 -->

Now at that time it was boiling hot.

<!-- @segment sn41.4:2.5 -->

And those senior mendicants walked along as if their bodies were melting, as happens after a meal.

<!-- @segment sn41.4:3.1 -->

Now at that time Venerable Mahaka was the most junior mendicant in that Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment sn41.4:3.2 -->

Then Venerable Mahaka said to the senior venerable,

<!-- @segment sn41.4:3.3 -->

“Wouldn’t it be nice, Honorable Senior, if a cool wind blew, a cloud canopy formed, and a gentle rain drizzled down?”

<!-- @segment sn41.4:4.1 -->

“It would indeed be nice, Reverend Mahaka.”

<!-- @segment sn41.4:4.2 -->

Then Mahaka used his psychic power to will that a cool wind would blow, a cloud canopy would form, and a gentle rain would drizzle down.

<!-- @segment sn41.4:4.3 -->

Then Citta thought,

<!-- @segment sn41.4:4.4 -->

“The most junior mendicant in this Saṅgha has such psychic power!”

<!-- @segment sn41.4:4.5 -->

When they reached the monastery, Mahaka said to the senior venerable,

<!-- @segment sn41.4:4.6 -->

“Honorable Senior, is that sufficient?”

<!-- @segment sn41.4:4.7 -->

“That’s sufficient, Reverend Mahaka,

<!-- @segment sn41.4:4.8 -->

you’ve done enough

<!-- @segment sn41.4:4.9 -->

and offered enough.”

<!-- @segment sn41.4:4.10 -->

Then the senior mendicants entered their dwellings,

<!-- @segment sn41.4:4.11 -->

and Mahaka entered his own dwelling.

<!-- @segment sn41.4:5.1 -->

Then Citta went up to Mahaka, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment sn41.4:5.2 -->

“Sir, please show me a superhuman demonstration of psychic power.”

<!-- @segment sn41.4:5.3 -->

“Well, then, householder, place your upper robe on the porch and spread a handful of grass on it.”

<!-- @segment sn41.4:5.4 -->

“Yes, sir,” replied Citta, and did as he was asked.

<!-- @segment sn41.4:5.5 -->

Mahaka entered his dwelling and latched the door. Then he used his psychic power to will that a flame shoot out through the keyhole and the chink in the door-panel, and it burned up the grass but not the upper robe.

<!-- @segment sn41.4:5.6 -->

Then Citta shook out his upper robe and stood to one side, shocked and awestruck.

<!-- @segment sn41.4:5.7 -->

Mahaka left his dwelling and said to Citta,

<!-- @segment sn41.4:5.8 -->

“Is that sufficient, householder?”

<!-- @segment sn41.4:6.1 -->

“That’s sufficient, sir,

<!-- @segment sn41.4:6.2 -->

you’ve done enough

<!-- @segment sn41.4:6.3 -->

and offered enough.

<!-- @segment sn41.4:6.4 -->

I hope Master Mahaka is happy here in Macchikāsaṇḍa,

<!-- @segment sn41.4:6.5 -->

for the Wild Mango Grove is lovely.

<!-- @segment sn41.4:6.6 -->

I’ll make sure that Master Mahaka is provided with robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.”

<!-- @segment sn41.4:6.7 -->

“That’s nice of you to say, householder.”

<!-- @segment sn41.4:6.8 -->

But Mahaka set his lodgings in order and, taking his bowl and robe, left Macchikāsaṇḍa,

<!-- @segment sn41.4:6.9 -->

never to return.

<!-- @segment sn41.4:6.10 -->
