---
slug: sn41.7
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Godatta
description: The householder Citta teaches on with godatta, showing the wisdom and direct knowledge of an exemplary lay follower.
qualities: liberation, delusion, greed, aversion, equanimity, ill will
theme: wisdom, story
---

<!-- @segment sn41.7:1.1 -->

At one time Venerable Godatta was staying near Macchikāsaṇḍa in the Wild Mango Grove.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:1.2 -->

Then Citta the householder went up to Venerable Godatta, bowed, and sat down to one side. Godatta said to him:

<!-- @segment sn41.7:1.3 -->

“Householder, the limitless release of the heart, and the release of the heart through nothingness, and the release of the heart through emptiness, and the signless release of the heart: do these things differ in both meaning and phrasing? Or do they mean the same thing, and differ only in the phrasing?”

<!-- @segment sn41.7:1.4 -->

“Sir, there is a way in which these things differ in both meaning and phrasing.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:1.5 -->

But there’s also a way in which they mean the same thing, and differ only in the phrasing.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:2.1 -->

And what’s the way in which these things differ in both meaning and phrasing?

<!-- @segment sn41.7:2.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:2.3 -->

They meditate spreading a heart full of compassion …

<!-- @segment sn41.7:2.4 -->

They meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing …

<!-- @segment sn41.7:2.5 -->

They meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:2.6 -->

This is called the limitless release of the heart.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:3.1 -->

And what is the release of the heart through nothingness?

<!-- @segment sn41.7:3.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, enters and remains in the dimension of nothingness.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:3.3 -->

This is called the release of the heart through nothingness.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:4.1 -->

And what is the release of the heart through emptiness?

<!-- @segment sn41.7:4.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, and reflects like this:

<!-- @segment sn41.7:4.3 -->

‘This is empty of a self or what belongs to a self.’

<!-- @segment sn41.7:4.4 -->

This is called the release of the heart through emptiness.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:5.1 -->

And what is the signless heart’s release?

<!-- @segment sn41.7:5.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant, not focusing on any signs, enters and remains in the signless immersion of the heart.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:5.3 -->

This is called the signless release of the heart.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:5.4 -->

This is the way in which these things differ in both meaning and phrasing.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:6.1 -->

And what’s the way in which they mean the same thing, and differ only in the phrasing?

<!-- @segment sn41.7:6.2 -->

Greed, hate, and delusion are makers of limits.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:6.3 -->

A mendicant who has ended the defilements has given these up, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, and obliterated them, so they are unable to arise in the future.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:6.4 -->

The unshakable release of the heart is said to be the best kind of limitless release of the heart.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:6.5 -->

That unshakable release of the heart is empty of greed, hate, and delusion.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:6.6 -->

Greed is something, hate is something, and delusion is something.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:6.7 -->

A mendicant who has ended the defilements has given these up, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, and obliterated them, so they are unable to arise in the future.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:6.8 -->

The unshakable release of the heart is said to be the best kind of release of the heart through nothingness.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:6.9 -->

That unshakable release of the heart is empty of greed, hate, and delusion.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:6.10 -->

Greed, hate, and delusion are makers of signs.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:6.11 -->

A mendicant who has ended the defilements has given these up, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, and obliterated them, so they are unable to arise in the future.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:6.12 -->

The unshakable release of the heart is said to be the best kind of signless release of the heart.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:6.13 -->

That unshakable release of the heart is empty of greed, hate, and delusion.

<!-- @segment sn41.7:6.14 -->

This is the way in which they mean the same thing, and differ only in the phrasing.”

<!-- @segment sn41.7:6.15 -->

“You’re fortunate, householder, so very fortunate,

<!-- @segment sn41.7:6.16 -->

to traverse the Buddha’s deep teachings with the eye of wisdom.”
