---
slug: sn41.1
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Fetter
---

<!-- @segment sn41.1:1.1 -->

At one time several senior mendicants were staying near Macchikāsaṇḍa in the Wild Mango Grove.

<!-- @segment sn41.1:1.2 -->

Now at that time, after the meal, on return from almsround, several senior mendicants sat together in the pavilion and this discussion came up among them:

<!-- @segment sn41.1:1.3 -->

“Reverends, the ‘fetter’ and the ‘things that tighten fetters’: do these things differ in both meaning and phrasing? Or do they mean the same thing, and differ only in the phrasing?”

<!-- @segment sn41.1:1.4 -->

Some senior mendicants answered like this:

<!-- @segment sn41.1:1.5 -->

“Reverends, the ‘fetter’ and the ‘things that tighten fetters’: these things differ in both meaning and phrasing.”

<!-- @segment sn41.1:1.6 -->

But some senior mendicants answered like this:

<!-- @segment sn41.1:1.7 -->

“Reverends, the ‘fetter’ and the ‘things that tighten fetters’ mean the same thing; they differ only in the phrasing.”

<!-- @segment sn41.1:2.1 -->

Now at that time the householder Citta had arrived at Migapathaka on some business.

<!-- @segment sn41.1:2.2 -->

He heard about what those senior mendicants were discussing.

<!-- @segment sn41.1:2.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.1:2.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.1:2.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.1:2.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.1:2.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.1:3.1 -->

So he went up to them, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to them,

<!-- @segment sn41.1:3.2 -->

“Sirs, I heard that you were discussing whether the ‘fetter’ and the ‘things that tighten fetters’ differ in both meaning and phrasing, or whether they mean the same thing, and differ only in the phrasing.”

<!-- @segment sn41.1:3.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.1:3.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.1:3.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.1:3.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.1:3.7 -->

“That’s right, householder.”

<!-- @segment sn41.1:4.1 -->

“Sirs, the ‘fetter’ and the ‘things that tighten fetters’: these things differ in both meaning and phrasing.

<!-- @segment sn41.1:4.2 -->

Well then, sirs, I shall give you a simile.

<!-- @segment sn41.1:4.3 -->

For by means of a simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

<!-- @segment sn41.1:4.4 -->

Suppose there was a black ox and a white ox yoked by a single harness or yoke.

<!-- @segment sn41.1:4.5 -->

Would it be right to say that

<!-- @segment sn41.1:4.6 -->

the black ox is the yoke of the white ox, or the white ox is the yoke of the black ox?”

<!-- @segment sn41.1:4.7 -->

“No, householder.

<!-- @segment sn41.1:4.8 -->

The black ox is not the yoke of the white ox, nor is the white ox the yoke of the black ox.

<!-- @segment sn41.1:4.9 -->

The yoke there is the single harness or yoke that they’re yoked by.”

<!-- @segment sn41.1:4.10 -->

“In the same way, the eye is not the fetter of sights, nor are sights the fetter of the eye.

<!-- @segment sn41.1:4.11 -->

The fetter there is the desire and greed that arises from the pair of them.

<!-- @segment sn41.1:4.12 -->

The ear … nose … tongue … body …

<!-- @segment sn41.1:4.13 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.1:4.14 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.1:4.15 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.1:4.16 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.1:4.17 -->

mind is not the fetter of ideas, nor are ideas the fetter of the mind.

<!-- @segment sn41.1:4.18 -->

The fetter there is the desire and greed that arises from the pair of them.”

<!-- @segment sn41.1:4.19 -->

“You’re fortunate, householder, so very fortunate,

<!-- @segment sn41.1:4.20 -->

to traverse the Buddha’s deep teachings with the eye of wisdom.”
