---
slug: sn41.10
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Seeing the Sick
description: The householder Citta of Macchikāsaṇḍa teaches mendicants and visitors on seeing the sick, displaying the learning and direct knowledge of an exemplary lay disciple.
qualities: desire, faith, wholesome, merit, suffering, giving
theme: inspiration, story
---

<!-- @segment sn41.10:1.1 -->

Now at that time the householder Citta was sick, suffering, gravely ill.

<!-- @segment sn41.10:1.2 -->

Then several deities of the parks, forests, trees, and those who haunt the herbs, grass, and big trees came together and said to Citta,

<!-- @segment sn41.10:1.3 -->

“Householder, make a wish to become a wheel-turning monarch in the future!”

<!-- @segment sn41.10:2.1 -->

When they said this, Citta said to them,

<!-- @segment sn41.10:2.2 -->

“That too is impermanent! That too will pass! That too will be left behind!”

<!-- @segment sn41.10:2.3 -->

When he said this, his friends and colleagues, relatives and kin said,

<!-- @segment sn41.10:2.4 -->

“Be mindful, master! Don’t babble.”

<!-- @segment sn41.10:2.5 -->

“What have I said that makes you say that?”

<!-- @segment sn41.10:2.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.10:2.7 -->

“It’s because you said:

<!-- @segment sn41.10:2.8 -->

‘That too is impermanent! That too will pass! That too will be left behind!’”

<!-- @segment sn41.10:2.9 -->

“Oh, well, that’s because the deities of the parks, forests, trees, and those who haunt the herbs, grass, and big trees said to me:

<!-- @segment sn41.10:2.10 -->

‘Householder, make a wish to become a wheel-turning monarch in the future!’

<!-- @segment sn41.10:2.11 -->

So I said to them:

<!-- @segment sn41.10:2.12 -->

‘That too is impermanent! That too will pass! That too will be left behind!’”

<!-- @segment sn41.10:2.13 -->

“But what reason do they see for saying that to you?”

<!-- @segment sn41.10:2.14 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.10:2.15 -->

“They think:

<!-- @segment sn41.10:2.16 -->

‘This householder Citta is ethical, of good character.

<!-- @segment sn41.10:2.17 -->

If he makes a wish to

<!-- @segment sn41.10:2.18 -->

become a wheel-turning monarch in the future, his heart’s wish will succeed because of the purity of his ethics. And then as a proper, principled king he will provide proper spirit-offerings.’

<!-- @segment sn41.10:2.19 -->

That’s the reason they see for saying to me:

<!-- @segment sn41.10:2.20 -->

‘Householder, make a wish to become a wheel-turning monarch in the future!’

<!-- @segment sn41.10:2.21 -->

So I said to them:

<!-- @segment sn41.10:2.22 -->

‘That too is impermanent! That too will pass! That too will be left behind!’”

<!-- @segment sn41.10:3.1 -->

“Then, master, advise us!”

<!-- @segment sn41.10:3.2 -->

“So you should train like this:

<!-- @segment sn41.10:3.3 -->

We will have experiential confidence in the Buddha:

<!-- @segment sn41.10:3.4 -->

‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’

<!-- @segment sn41.10:3.5 -->

We will have experiential confidence in the teaching:

<!-- @segment sn41.10:3.6 -->

‘The teaching is well explained by the Buddha—apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.’

<!-- @segment sn41.10:3.7 -->

We will have experiential confidence in the Saṅgha:

<!-- @segment sn41.10:3.8 -->

‘The Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples is practicing the way that’s good, direct, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight individual persons. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with cupped palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.’

<!-- @segment sn41.10:3.9 -->

And we will share without reservation all the gifts available to give in our family with those who are ethical and of good character.”

<!-- @segment sn41.10:3.10 -->

Then, after Citta had encouraged his friends and colleagues, relatives and kin in the Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha, and generosity, he passed away.

<!-- @segment sn41.10:3.11 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.10:3.12 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.10:4.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.10:4.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.10:4.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.10:4.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.10:4.5 -->

The Linked Discourses on Citta the Householder are complete.
