---
slug: sn41.5
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Kāmabhū (1st)
---

<!-- @segment sn41.5:1.1 -->

At one time Venerable Kāmabhū was staying near Macchikāsaṇḍa in the Wild Mango Grove.

<!-- @segment sn41.5:1.2 -->

Then Citta the householder went up to Venerable Kāmabhū, bowed, and sat down to one side. Kāmabhū said to him,

<!-- @segment sn41.5:2.1 -->

“Householder, there is this saying:

<!-- @segment sn41.5:3.1 -->

‘With faultless parts and white canopy,

<!-- @segment sn41.5:3.2 -->

the one-spoked chariot rolls on.

<!-- @segment sn41.5:3.3 -->

See it come, untroubled,

<!-- @segment sn41.5:3.4 -->

with stream cut, unbound.’

<!-- @segment sn41.5:4.1 -->

How should we see the detailed meaning of this brief statement?”

<!-- @segment sn41.5:4.2 -->

“Sir, was this spoken by the Buddha?”

<!-- @segment sn41.5:4.3 -->

“Yes, householder.”

<!-- @segment sn41.5:4.4 -->

“Well then, sir, please wait a while as I consider the meaning of this.”

<!-- @segment sn41.5:4.5 -->

Then after staying silent for a while, Citta said to Kāmabhū:

<!-- @segment sn41.5:5.1 -->

“Sir, ‘faultless parts’ is a term for ethics.

<!-- @segment sn41.5:5.2 -->

‘White canopy’ is a term for freedom.

<!-- @segment sn41.5:5.3 -->

‘One spoke’ is a term for mindfulness.

<!-- @segment sn41.5:5.4 -->

‘Rolls on’ is a term for going forward and coming back.

<!-- @segment sn41.5:5.5 -->

‘Chariot’ is a term for this body made up of the four principal states, produced by mother and father, built up from rice and porridge, liable to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and destruction.

<!-- @segment sn41.5:5.6 -->

Greed, hate, and delusion are troubles.

<!-- @segment sn41.5:5.7 -->

A mendicant who has ended the defilements has given these up, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, and obliterated them, so they are unable to arise in the future.

<!-- @segment sn41.5:5.8 -->

That’s why a mendicant who has ended the defilements is called ‘untroubled’.

<!-- @segment sn41.5:5.9 -->

‘The one who comes’ is a term for the perfected one.

<!-- @segment sn41.5:5.10 -->

‘Stream’ is a term for craving.

<!-- @segment sn41.5:5.11 -->

A mendicant who has ended the defilements has given this up, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, and obliterated it, so it’s unable to arise in the future.

<!-- @segment sn41.5:5.12 -->

That’s why a mendicant who has ended the defilements is said to have ‘cut the stream’.

<!-- @segment sn41.5:5.13 -->

Greed, hate, and delusion are bonds.

<!-- @segment sn41.5:5.14 -->

A mendicant who has ended the defilements has given these up, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, and obliterated them, so they are unable to arise in the future.

<!-- @segment sn41.5:5.15 -->

That’s why a mendicant who has ended the defilements is called ‘unbound’.

<!-- @segment sn41.5:5.16 -->

So, sir, that’s how I understand the detailed meaning of what the Buddha said in brief:

<!-- @segment sn41.5:6.1 -->

‘With faultless parts and white canopy,

<!-- @segment sn41.5:6.2 -->

the one-spoked chariot rolls on.

<!-- @segment sn41.5:6.3 -->

See it come, untroubled,

<!-- @segment sn41.5:6.4 -->

with stream cut, unbound.’”

<!-- @segment sn41.5:7.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.5:7.2 -->

“You’re fortunate, householder, so very fortunate,

<!-- @segment sn41.5:7.3 -->

to traverse the Buddha’s deep teachings with the eye of wisdom.”
