---
slug: sn41.3
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Isidatta (2nd)
description: The householder Citta teaches on with isidatta (2nd), showing the wisdom and direct knowledge of an exemplary lay follower.
qualities: respect, tame, adventurousness, wholesome, learned, craving
theme: wisdom, story
---

<!-- @segment sn41.3:1.1 -->

At one time several senior mendicants were staying near Macchikāsaṇḍa in the Wild Mango Grove.

<!-- @segment sn41.3:1.2 -->

Then Citta the householder went up to them, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to them,

<!-- @segment sn41.3:1.3 -->

“Sirs, would the senior monks please accept tomorrow’s meal from me?”

<!-- @segment sn41.3:1.4 -->

They consented with silence.

<!-- @segment sn41.3:1.5 -->

Then, knowing that the senior mendicants had consented, Citta rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled them, keeping them on his right, before leaving.

<!-- @segment sn41.3:1.6 -->

Then when the night had passed, the senior mendicants robed up in the morning and, taking their bowls and robes, went to Citta’s home, and sat down on the seats spread out.

<!-- @segment sn41.3:2.1 -->

So he went up to them, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the senior venerable:

<!-- @segment sn41.3:2.2 -->

“Honorable Senior, there are many different views that arise in the world. For example:

<!-- @segment sn41.3:2.3 -->

the cosmos is eternal, or not eternal, or finite, or infinite; the soul and the body are one and the same, or the soul is one thing, the body another; after death, a realized one still exists, or no longer exists, or both still exists and no longer exists, or neither still exists nor no longer exists.

<!-- @segment sn41.3:2.4 -->

And also the sixty-two misconceptions spoken of in “The Divine Net”.

<!-- @segment sn41.3:2.5 -->

When what exists do these views come to be? When what doesn’t exist do these views not come to be?”

<!-- @segment sn41.3:3.1 -->

When he said this, the senior venerable kept silent.

<!-- @segment sn41.3:3.2 -->

For a second time …

<!-- @segment sn41.3:3.3 -->

And for a third time, Citta said to him:

<!-- @segment sn41.3:3.4 -->

“Honorable Senior, there are many different views that arise in the world. …

<!-- @segment sn41.3:3.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.3:3.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.3:3.7 -->

When what exists do these views come to be? When what doesn’t exist do these views not come to be?”

<!-- @segment sn41.3:3.8 -->

And a second time and a third time the senior venerable kept silent.

<!-- @segment sn41.3:4.1 -->

Now at that time Venerable Isidatta was the most junior mendicant in that Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment sn41.3:4.2 -->

He said to the senior venerable,

<!-- @segment sn41.3:4.3 -->

“Honorable Senior, may I answer Citta’s question?”

<!-- @segment sn41.3:4.4 -->

“Answer it, Reverend Isidatta.”

<!-- @segment sn41.3:4.5 -->

“Householder, is this your question:

<!-- @segment sn41.3:4.6 -->

‘There are many different views that arise in the world …

<!-- @segment sn41.3:4.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.3:4.8 -->

When what exists do these views come to be? When what doesn’t exist do these views not come to be?’”

<!-- @segment sn41.3:4.9 -->

“Yes, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn41.3:4.10 -->

“Householder, there are many different views that arise in the world. For example:

<!-- @segment sn41.3:4.11 -->

the cosmos is eternal, or not eternal, or finite, or infinite; the soul and the body are one and the same, or the soul is one thing, the body another; after death, a realized one still exists, or no longer exists, or both still exists and no longer exists, or neither still exists nor no longer exists.

<!-- @segment sn41.3:4.12 -->

And also the sixty-two misconceptions spoken of in “The Divine Net”.

<!-- @segment sn41.3:4.13 -->

These views come to be when substantialist view exists. When substantialist view does not exist they do not come to be.”

<!-- @segment sn41.3:5.1 -->

“But sir, how does substantialist view come about?”

<!-- @segment sn41.3:5.2 -->

“It’s when an unlearned ordinary person has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve not seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the true persons.

<!-- @segment sn41.3:5.3 -->

They regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form.

<!-- @segment sn41.3:5.4 -->

They regard feeling …

<!-- @segment sn41.3:5.5 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn41.3:5.6 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn41.3:5.7 -->

consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn41.3:5.8 -->

That’s how substantialist view comes about.”

<!-- @segment sn41.3:6.1 -->

“But sir, how does substantialist view not come about?”

<!-- @segment sn41.3:6.2 -->

“It’s when a learned noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve seen true persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true persons.

<!-- @segment sn41.3:6.3 -->

They don’t regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form.

<!-- @segment sn41.3:6.4 -->

They don’t regard feeling …

<!-- @segment sn41.3:6.5 -->

perception …

<!-- @segment sn41.3:6.6 -->

choices …

<!-- @segment sn41.3:6.7 -->

consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn41.3:6.8 -->

That’s how substantialist view does not come about.”

<!-- @segment sn41.3:7.1 -->

“Sir, where has Master Isidatta come from?”

<!-- @segment sn41.3:7.2 -->

“I come from Avanti, householder.”

<!-- @segment sn41.3:7.3 -->

“Sir, there’s a friend of mine named Isidatta who I’ve never met. He’s gone forth from a good family in Avanti.

<!-- @segment sn41.3:7.4 -->

Have you met him?”

<!-- @segment sn41.3:7.5 -->

“Yes, householder.”

<!-- @segment sn41.3:7.6 -->

“Sir, where is that venerable now staying?”

<!-- @segment sn41.3:7.7 -->

When he said this, Isidatta kept silent.

<!-- @segment sn41.3:7.8 -->

“Sir, are you that Isidatta?”

<!-- @segment sn41.3:7.9 -->

“Yes, householder.”

<!-- @segment sn41.3:7.10 -->

“Sir, I hope Master Isidatta is happy here in Macchikāsaṇḍa,

<!-- @segment sn41.3:7.11 -->

for the Wild Mango Grove is lovely.

<!-- @segment sn41.3:7.12 -->

I’ll make sure that Master Isidatta is provided with robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.”

<!-- @segment sn41.3:7.13 -->

“That’s nice of you to say, householder.”

<!-- @segment sn41.3:8.1 -->

Then Citta, having approved and agreed with what Isidatta said, served and satisfied the senior mendicants with his own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods.

<!-- @segment sn41.3:8.2 -->

When the senior mendicants had eaten and washed their hands and bowls, they rose from their seats and left.

<!-- @segment sn41.3:8.3 -->

Then the senior venerable said to Venerable Isidatta,

<!-- @segment sn41.3:8.4 -->

“Isidatta, it’s good that you felt inspired to answer that question, because I didn’t.

<!-- @segment sn41.3:8.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn41.3:8.6 -->

So when a similar question comes up, you should also answer it as you feel inspired.”

<!-- @segment sn41.3:8.7 -->

But Isidatta set his lodgings in order and, taking his bowl and robe, left Macchikāsaṇḍa,

<!-- @segment sn41.3:8.8 -->

never to return.
