---
slug: sn41.8
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Jain Ascetic of the Ñātika Clan
description: The householder Citta of Macchikāsaṇḍa teaches mendicants and visitors on the jain ascetic of the ñātika clan, displaying the learning and direct knowledge of an exemplary lay disciple.
qualities: attachment, faith, jhana, wholesome, ending, uplifting joy
theme: inspiration, story
---

<!-- @segment sn41.8:1.1 -->

Now at that time the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan had arrived at Macchikāsaṇḍa together with a large assembly of Jain ascetics.

<!-- @segment sn41.8:1.2 -->

Citta the householder heard that they had arrived.

<!-- @segment sn41.8:1.3 -->

Together with several lay followers, he went up to the Jain Ñātika and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment sn41.8:1.4 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side. The Jain Ñātika said to him,

<!-- @segment sn41.8:1.5 -->

“Householder, do you have faith in the ascetic Gotama’s claim that

<!-- @segment sn41.8:1.6 -->

there is a state of immersion without placing the mind and keeping it connected; that there is the cessation of placing the mind and keeping it connected?”

<!-- @segment sn41.8:2.1 -->

“Sir, in this case I don’t rely on faith in the Buddha’s claim that

<!-- @segment sn41.8:2.2 -->

there is a state of immersion without placing the mind and keeping it connected; that there is the cessation of placing the mind and keeping it connected.”

<!-- @segment sn41.8:2.3 -->

When he said this, the Jain Ñātika looked up at his assembly and said,

<!-- @segment sn41.8:2.4 -->

“See, good fellows, how straightforward this householder Citta is! He’s not devious or deceitful at all. To imagine that you can stop placing the mind and keeping it connected would be like imagining that you can catch the wind in a net, or dam the Ganges river with your own hand.”

<!-- @segment sn41.8:3.1 -->

“What do you think, sir?

<!-- @segment sn41.8:3.2 -->

Which is better—knowledge or faith?”

<!-- @segment sn41.8:3.3 -->

“Knowledge is definitely better than faith, householder.”

<!-- @segment sn41.8:3.4 -->

“Well sir, whenever I want, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, I enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment sn41.8:3.5 -->

And whenever I want, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled … I enter and remain in the second absorption.

<!-- @segment sn41.8:3.6 -->

And whenever I want, with the fading away of rapture … I enter and remain in the third absorption.

<!-- @segment sn41.8:3.7 -->

And whenever I want, giving up pleasure and pain … I enter and remain in the fourth absorption.

<!-- @segment sn41.8:3.8 -->

And so, sir, since I know and see like this, why should I rely on faith in another ascetic or brahmin who claims that

<!-- @segment sn41.8:3.9 -->

there is a state of immersion without placing the mind and keeping it connected; that there is the cessation of placing the mind and keeping it connected?”

<!-- @segment sn41.8:4.1 -->

When he said this, the Jain Ñātika looked askance at his own assembly and said,

<!-- @segment sn41.8:4.2 -->

“See, good fellows, how crooked this householder Citta is! He’s so devious and deceitful!”

<!-- @segment sn41.8:5.1 -->

“Sir, just now I understood you to say:

<!-- @segment sn41.8:5.2 -->

‘See, good fellows, how straightforward this householder Citta is! He’s not devious or deceitful at all.’

<!-- @segment sn41.8:5.3 -->

But then I understood you to say:

<!-- @segment sn41.8:5.4 -->

‘See, good fellows, how crooked this householder Citta is! He’s so devious and deceitful!’

<!-- @segment sn41.8:5.5 -->

If your first statement is true, the second is wrong.

<!-- @segment sn41.8:5.6 -->

If your first statement is wrong, the second is true.

<!-- @segment sn41.8:5.7 -->

And also, sir, these ten legitimate questions are relevant.

<!-- @segment sn41.8:5.8 -->

When you understand what they mean, then, together with your assembly of Jain ascetics, you can rebut me.

<!-- @segment sn41.8:5.9 -->

‘One thing: question, summary, and answer.

<!-- @segment sn41.8:5.10 -->

Two …

<!-- @segment sn41.8:5.11 -->

Three …

<!-- @segment sn41.8:5.12 -->

Four …

<!-- @segment sn41.8:5.13 -->

Five …

<!-- @segment sn41.8:5.14 -->

Six …

<!-- @segment sn41.8:5.15 -->

Seven …

<!-- @segment sn41.8:5.16 -->

Eight …

<!-- @segment sn41.8:5.17 -->

Nine …

<!-- @segment sn41.8:5.18 -->

Ten things: question, summary, and answer.’”

<!-- @segment sn41.8:5.19 -->

Then Citta rose from his seat and left without asking the Jain Ñātika these ten legitimate questions.
