---
slug: sn42.10
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Maṇicūḷaka
description: The Buddha teaches headmen and householders on with maṇicūḷaka, guiding lay followers toward ethical conduct, generosity, and confidence in the Dhamma.
qualities: faith, respect, wholesome
theme: training guideline, story
---

<!-- @segment sn42.10:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground.

<!-- @segment sn42.10:1.2 -->

Now at that time while the king’s retinue was sitting together in the royal compound this discussion came up among them,

<!-- @segment sn42.10:1.3 -->

“Gold and currency are proper for ascetics who follow the Sakyan. They accept and receive gold and currency.”

<!-- @segment sn42.10:2.1 -->

Now at that time the chief Maṇicūḷaka was sitting in that assembly.

<!-- @segment sn42.10:2.2 -->

He said to that retinue,

<!-- @segment sn42.10:2.3 -->

“Good masters, don’t say that.

<!-- @segment sn42.10:2.4 -->

Gold and currency are not proper for ascetics who follow the Sakyan. They neither accept nor receive gold and currency. They have set aside gems and gold, and quit using gold and currency.”

<!-- @segment sn42.10:2.5 -->

He was able to persuade that assembly.

<!-- @segment sn42.10:2.6 -->

Then Maṇicūḷaka went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. He then said,

<!-- @segment sn42.10:2.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.10:2.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.10:2.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.10:2.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.10:2.11 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.10:2.12 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.10:2.13 -->

“Answering this way, I trust that I repeat what the Buddha has said, and don’t misrepresent him with an untruth. I trust my explanation is in line with the teaching, and that there are no legitimate grounds for rebuttal or criticism.”

<!-- @segment sn42.10:3.1 -->

“Indeed, in answering this way you repeat what I’ve said, and don’t misrepresent me with an untruth. Your explanation is in line with the teaching, and there are no legitimate grounds for rebuttal or criticism.

<!-- @segment sn42.10:3.2 -->

Gold and currency are not proper for ascetics who follow the Sakyan. They neither accept nor receive gold and currency. They have set aside gems and gold, and quit using gold and currency.

<!-- @segment sn42.10:3.3 -->

If gold and currency were proper for them, then the five kinds of sensual stimulation would also be proper.

<!-- @segment sn42.10:3.4 -->

And if the five kinds of sensual stimulation are proper for them, you should categorically regard them as not having the qualities of an ascetic or a follower of the Sakyan.

<!-- @segment sn42.10:3.5 -->

Rather, chief, I say this:

<!-- @segment sn42.10:3.6 -->

Straw may be looked for by one needing straw; wood may be looked for by one needing wood; a cart may be looked for by one needing a cart; a workman may be looked for by one needing a workman.

<!-- @segment sn42.10:3.7 -->

But in any case, there is no way they can accept or look for gold and currency, I say .”
