---
slug: sn42.8
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: A Horn Blower
description: The Buddha teaches headmen and householders on a horn blower, guiding lay followers toward ethical conduct, generosity, and confidence in the Dhamma.
qualities: wrong speech, slaughtering, sexual misconduct, ill will, equanimity, stealing
theme: training guideline, story
---

<!-- @segment sn42.8:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Nāḷandā in Pāvārika’s mango grove.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:1.2 -->

Then Asibandhaka’s son the chief, who was a disciple of the Jains, went up to the Buddha, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him,

<!-- @segment sn42.8:1.3 -->

“Chief, how does the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan teach his disciples?”

<!-- @segment sn42.8:1.4 -->

“Sir, this is how the Jain Ñātika teaches his disciples:

<!-- @segment sn42.8:1.5 -->

‘Everyone who kills a living creature, steals, commits sexual misconduct, or lies goes to a place of loss, to hell.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:1.6 -->

You’re led on by what you frequently live by.’

<!-- @segment sn42.8:1.7 -->

This is how the Jain Ñātika teaches his disciples.”

<!-- @segment sn42.8:1.8 -->

“‘You’re led on by what you usually live by’: if this were true, then, according to what the Jain Ñātika says, no-one would go to a place of loss, to hell.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:2.1 -->

What do you think, chief?

<!-- @segment sn42.8:2.2 -->

Take an individual who kills living creatures. If we compare periods of time during the day and night, which is more frequent: the occasions when they’re killing or when they’re not killing?”

<!-- @segment sn42.8:2.3 -->

“The occasions when they’re killing are less frequent, while the occasions when they’re not killing are more frequent.”

<!-- @segment sn42.8:2.4 -->

“‘You’re led on by what you usually live by’: if this were true, then, according to what the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan says, no-one would go to a place of loss, to hell.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:3.1 -->

What do you think, chief?

<!-- @segment sn42.8:3.2 -->

Take an individual who steals …

<!-- @segment sn42.8:3.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:3.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:4.1 -->

Take an individual who commits sexual misconduct …

<!-- @segment sn42.8:4.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:4.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:5.1 -->

Take an individual who lies. If we compare periods of time during the day and night, which is more frequent: the occasions when they’re lying or when they’re not lying?”

<!-- @segment sn42.8:5.2 -->

“The occasions when they’re lying are less frequent, while the occasions when they’re not lying are more frequent.”

<!-- @segment sn42.8:5.3 -->

“‘You’re led on by what you usually live by’: if this were true, then, according to what the Jain Ñātika says, no-one would go to a place of loss, to hell.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:6.1 -->

Take some teacher who has this doctrine and view:

<!-- @segment sn42.8:6.2 -->

‘Everyone who kills a living creature, steals, commits sexual misconduct, or lies goes to a place of loss, to hell.’

<!-- @segment sn42.8:6.3 -->

And there’s a disciple who is devoted to that teacher.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:6.4 -->

They think:

<!-- @segment sn42.8:6.5 -->

‘My teacher has this doctrine and view:

<!-- @segment sn42.8:6.6 -->

“Everyone who kills a living creature, steals, commits sexual misconduct, or lies goes to a place of loss, to hell.”

<!-- @segment sn42.8:6.7 -->

But I’ve killed living creatures …

<!-- @segment sn42.8:6.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:6.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:6.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:6.11 -->

stolen …

<!-- @segment sn42.8:6.12 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:6.13 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:6.14 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:6.15 -->

committed sexual misconduct …

<!-- @segment sn42.8:6.16 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:6.17 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:6.18 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:6.19 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:6.20 -->

or lied.’

<!-- @segment sn42.8:6.21 -->

They get the view: ‘I too am going to a place of loss, to hell.’

<!-- @segment sn42.8:6.22 -->

Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be placed in hell as if delivered there.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:7.1 -->

But consider when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:7.2 -->

In many ways he criticizes and denounces killing living creatures, saying: ‘Stop killing living creatures!’

<!-- @segment sn42.8:7.3 -->

He criticizes and denounces stealing …

<!-- @segment sn42.8:7.4 -->

sexual misconduct …

<!-- @segment sn42.8:7.5 -->

lying, saying: ‘Stop lying!’

<!-- @segment sn42.8:7.6 -->

And there’s a disciple who is devoted to that teacher.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:7.7 -->

Then they reflect:

<!-- @segment sn42.8:7.8 -->

‘In many ways the Buddha criticizes and denounces killing living creatures, saying: “Stop killing living creatures!”

<!-- @segment sn42.8:7.9 -->

But I have killed living creatures to a certain extent.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:7.10 -->

That’s not right, it’s not good,

<!-- @segment sn42.8:7.11 -->

and I feel remorseful because of it.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:7.12 -->

But I can’t undo what I have done.’

<!-- @segment sn42.8:7.13 -->

Reflecting like this, they give up killing living creatures,

<!-- @segment sn42.8:7.14 -->

and in future they don’t kill living creatures.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:7.15 -->

That’s how to give up this bad deed

<!-- @segment sn42.8:7.16 -->

and get past it.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:8.1 -->

‘In many ways the Buddha criticizes and denounces stealing …’

<!-- @segment sn42.8:8.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:8.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:8.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:8.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:8.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:8.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:8.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:9.1 -->

‘In many ways the Buddha criticizes and denounces sexual misconduct …’

<!-- @segment sn42.8:9.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:9.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:9.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:9.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:9.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:9.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.8:10.1 -->

‘In many ways the Buddha criticizes and denounces lying, saying: “Stop lying!”

<!-- @segment sn42.8:10.2 -->

But I have lied to a certain extent.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:10.3 -->

That’s not right, it’s not good, and I feel remorseful because of it. But I can’t undo what I have done.’

<!-- @segment sn42.8:10.4 -->

Reflecting like this, they give up lying, and in future they refrain from lying.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:10.5 -->

That’s how to give up this bad deed and get past it.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:11.1 -->

They give up killing living creatures.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:11.2 -->

They give up stealing.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:11.3 -->

They give up sexual misconduct.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:11.4 -->

They give up lying.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:11.5 -->

They give up backbiting.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:11.6 -->

They give up harsh speech.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:11.7 -->

They give up talking nonsense.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:11.8 -->

They give up covetousness.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:11.9 -->

They give up ill will and malevolence.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:11.10 -->

They give up wrong view and have right view.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:12.1 -->

That noble disciple is rid of desire, rid of ill will, unconfused, aware, and mindful. They meditate spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:12.2 -->

Suppose there was a powerful horn blower. They’d easily make themselves heard in the four quarters.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:12.3 -->

In the same way, when the heart’s release by love has been developed and cultivated like this, any limited deeds they’ve done don’t remain or persist there.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:13.1 -->

Then that noble disciple is rid of desire, rid of ill will, unconfused, aware, and mindful. They meditate spreading a heart full of compassion …

<!-- @segment sn42.8:13.2 -->

They meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing …

<!-- @segment sn42.8:13.3 -->

They meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:13.4 -->

Suppose there was a powerful horn blower. They’d easily make themselves heard in the four quarters.

<!-- @segment sn42.8:13.5 -->

In the same way, when the heart’s release by equanimity has been developed and cultivated like this, any limited deeds they’ve done don’t remain or persist there.”

<!-- @segment sn42.8:14.1 -->

When he said this, Asibandhaka’s son the chief said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment sn42.8:14.2 -->

“Excellent, sir! Excellent! …

<!-- @segment sn42.8:14.3 -->

From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”
