---
slug: sn42.9
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Families
---

<!-- @segment sn42.9:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he arrived at Nāḷandā.

<!-- @segment sn42.9:1.2 -->

There he stayed near Nāḷandā in Pāvārika’s mango grove.

<!-- @segment sn42.9:2.1 -->

Now at that time Nāḷandā was undergoing famine and scarcity, with crops blighted and turned to straw.

<!-- @segment sn42.9:2.2 -->

At that time the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan was residing at Nāḷandā together with a large assembly of Jain ascetics.

<!-- @segment sn42.9:2.3 -->

Then Asibandhaka’s son the chief, who was a disciple of the Jains, went up to the Jain Ñātika, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Jain Ñātika said to him:

<!-- @segment sn42.9:2.4 -->

“Come, chief, refute the ascetic Gotama’s doctrine.

<!-- @segment sn42.9:2.5 -->

Then you will get a good reputation:

<!-- @segment sn42.9:2.6 -->

‘Asibandhaka’s son the chief refuted the doctrine of the ascetic Gotama, so mighty and powerful!’”

<!-- @segment sn42.9:3.1 -->

“But sir, how am I to do this?”

<!-- @segment sn42.9:3.2 -->

“Here, brahmin, go to the ascetic Gotama and say to him:

<!-- @segment sn42.9:3.3 -->

‘Sir, don’t you in many ways praise kindness, protection, and sympathy for families?’

<!-- @segment sn42.9:3.4 -->

When he’s asked this, if he answers:

<!-- @segment sn42.9:3.5 -->

‘Indeed I do, chief,’ say this to him:

<!-- @segment sn42.9:3.6 -->

‘So what then are you doing, wandering together with this large Saṅgha of mendicants during a time of famine and scarcity, with crops blighted and turned to straw?

<!-- @segment sn42.9:3.7 -->

The Buddha is practicing to annihilate, collapse, and ruin families!’

<!-- @segment sn42.9:3.8 -->

When you put this dilemma to him, the Buddha won’t be able to either spit it out or swallow it down.”

<!-- @segment sn42.9:3.9 -->

“Yes, sir,” replied Asibandhaka’s son. He rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Jain Ñātika, keeping him on his right. Then he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

<!-- @segment sn42.9:4.1 -->

“Sir, don’t you in many ways praise kindness, protection, and sympathy for families?”

<!-- @segment sn42.9:4.2 -->

“Indeed I do, chief.”

<!-- @segment sn42.9:4.3 -->

“So what then are you doing, wandering together with this large Saṅgha of mendicants during a time of famine and scarcity, with crops blighted and turned to straw?

<!-- @segment sn42.9:4.4 -->

The Buddha is practicing to annihilate, collapse, and ruin families!”

<!-- @segment sn42.9:4.5 -->

“Well, chief, I recollect ninety-one eons back but I’m not aware of any family that’s been ruined merely by offering some cooked almsfood.

<!-- @segment sn42.9:4.6 -->

Rather, rich, affluent, and wealthy families—with lots of gold and silver, lots of property and assets, and lots of money and grain—all acquired their wealth because of giving, truth, and restraint.

<!-- @segment sn42.9:4.7 -->

Chief, there are eight causes and reasons for the ruin of families.

<!-- @segment sn42.9:4.8 -->

Their ruin stems from rulers, bandits, fire, or flood. Or they lose their savings. Or their business fails due to not applying themselves to work. Or a wastrel is born into the family who squanders and fritters away their wealth. And impermanence is the eighth.

<!-- @segment sn42.9:4.9 -->

These are the eight causes and reasons for the ruin of families.

<!-- @segment sn42.9:4.10 -->

Given that these eight reasons are found, suppose someone says this:

<!-- @segment sn42.9:4.11 -->

‘The Buddha is practicing to annihilate, collapse, and ruin families!’

<!-- @segment sn42.9:4.12 -->

Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be placed in hell as if delivered there.”

<!-- @segment sn42.9:5.1 -->

When he said this, Asibandhaka’s son the chief said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment sn42.9:5.2 -->

“Excellent, sir! Excellent! …

<!-- @segment sn42.9:5.3 -->

From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”
