---
slug: sn42.3
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: A Warrior
---

<!-- @segment sn42.3:1.1 -->

Then Dustin the warrior chief went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

<!-- @segment sn42.3:1.2 -->

“Sir, I have heard that the warriors of the past who were tutors of tutors said:

<!-- @segment sn42.3:1.3 -->

‘Suppose a warrior, while striving and struggling in battle, is killed and finished off by his foes. When his body breaks up, after death, he’s reborn in the company of the gods of the fallen.’

<!-- @segment sn42.3:1.4 -->

What does the Buddha say about this?”

<!-- @segment sn42.3:1.5 -->

“Enough, chief, let it be. Don’t ask me that.”

<!-- @segment sn42.3:1.6 -->

For a second time …

<!-- @segment sn42.3:1.7 -->

And for a third time Dustin the warrior chief said to the Buddha:

<!-- @segment sn42.3:1.8 -->

“Sir, I have heard that the warriors of the past who were tutors of tutors said:

<!-- @segment sn42.3:1.9 -->

‘Suppose a warrior, while striving and struggling in battle, is killed and finished off by his foes. When his body breaks up, after death, he’s reborn in the company of the gods of the fallen.’

<!-- @segment sn42.3:1.10 -->

What does the Buddha say about this?”

<!-- @segment sn42.3:2.1 -->

“Clearly, chief, I’m not getting through to you when I say:

<!-- @segment sn42.3:2.2 -->

‘Enough, chief, let it be. Don’t ask me that.’

<!-- @segment sn42.3:2.3 -->

Nevertheless, I will answer you.

<!-- @segment sn42.3:2.4 -->

When a warrior strives and struggles in battle, their mind is already low, degraded, and misdirected as they think:

<!-- @segment sn42.3:2.5 -->

‘May these sentient beings be killed, slaughtered, slain, destroyed, or annihilated!’

<!-- @segment sn42.3:2.6 -->

His foes kill him and finish him off, and

<!-- @segment sn42.3:2.7 -->

when his body breaks up, after death, he’s reborn in the hell called ‘The Fallen’.

<!-- @segment sn42.3:2.8 -->

But if you have such a view:

<!-- @segment sn42.3:2.9 -->

‘Suppose a warrior, while striving and struggling in battle, is killed and finished off by his foes. When his body breaks up, after death, he’s reborn in the company of the gods of the fallen.’ This is your wrong view.

<!-- @segment sn42.3:2.10 -->

An individual with wrong view is reborn in one of two places, I say:

<!-- @segment sn42.3:2.11 -->

hell or the animal realm.”

<!-- @segment sn42.3:3.1 -->

When he said this, Dustin the warrior chief cried and burst out in tears.

<!-- @segment sn42.3:3.2 -->

“This is what I didn’t get through to you when I said:

<!-- @segment sn42.3:3.3 -->

‘Enough, chief, let it be. Don’t ask me that.’”

<!-- @segment sn42.3:3.4 -->

“Sir, I’m not crying because of what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment sn42.3:3.5 -->

But sir, for a long time I’ve been cheated, tricked, and deceived by the warriors of the past who were tutors of tutors, who said:

<!-- @segment sn42.3:3.6 -->

‘Suppose a warrior, while striving and struggling in battle, is killed and finished off by his foes. When his body breaks up, after death, he’s reborn in the company of the gods of the fallen.’

<!-- @segment sn42.3:3.7 -->

Excellent, sir! Excellent! …

<!-- @segment sn42.3:3.8 -->

From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”
