---
slug: sn42.2
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Tālapuṭa
---

<!-- @segment sn42.2:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground.

<!-- @segment sn42.2:1.2 -->

Then Tālapuṭa the dancing chief came up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha:

<!-- @segment sn42.2:1.3 -->

“Sir, I have heard that the dancers of the past who were tutors of tutors said:

<!-- @segment sn42.2:1.4 -->

‘Suppose a dancer entertains and amuses people on a stage or at a festival with mixed truth and lies. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of laughing gods.’

<!-- @segment sn42.2:1.5 -->

What does the Buddha say about this?”

<!-- @segment sn42.2:1.6 -->

“Enough, chief, let it be. Don’t ask me that.”

<!-- @segment sn42.2:1.7 -->

For a second time …

<!-- @segment sn42.2:1.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.2:1.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.2:1.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.2:1.11 -->



<!-- @segment sn42.2:1.12 -->

And for a third time Tālapuṭa said to the Buddha:

<!-- @segment sn42.2:1.13 -->

“Sir, I have heard that the dancers of the past who were tutors of tutors said:

<!-- @segment sn42.2:1.14 -->

‘Suppose a dancer entertains and amuses people on a stage or at a festival with mixed truth and lies. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of laughing gods.’

<!-- @segment sn42.2:1.15 -->

What does the Buddha say about this?”

<!-- @segment sn42.2:2.1 -->

“Clearly, chief, I’m not getting through to you when I say:

<!-- @segment sn42.2:2.2 -->

‘Enough, chief, let it be.

<!-- @segment sn42.2:2.3 -->

Don’t ask me that.’

<!-- @segment sn42.2:2.4 -->

Nevertheless, I will answer you.

<!-- @segment sn42.2:2.5 -->

When sentient beings are still not free of greed, and are still bound by greed,

<!-- @segment sn42.2:2.6 -->

a dancer in a stage or festival presents them with even more arousing things.

<!-- @segment sn42.2:2.7 -->

When sentient beings are still not free of hate, and are still bound by hate,

<!-- @segment sn42.2:2.8 -->

a dancer in a stage or festival presents them with even more hateful things.

<!-- @segment sn42.2:2.9 -->

When sentient beings are still not free of delusion, and are still bound by delusion,

<!-- @segment sn42.2:2.10 -->

a dancer in a stage or festival presents them with even more delusory things.

<!-- @segment sn42.2:2.11 -->

And so, being heedless and negligent themselves, they’ve encouraged others to be heedless and negligent. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the hell called ‘Laughter’.

<!-- @segment sn42.2:2.12 -->

But if you have such a view:

<!-- @segment sn42.2:2.13 -->

‘Suppose a dancer entertains and amuses people on a stage or at a festival with mixed truth and lies. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of laughing gods.’ This is your wrong view.

<!-- @segment sn42.2:2.14 -->

An individual with wrong view is reborn in one of two places, I say:

<!-- @segment sn42.2:2.15 -->

hell or the animal realm.”

<!-- @segment sn42.2:3.1 -->

When he said this, Tālapuṭa cried and burst out in tears.

<!-- @segment sn42.2:3.2 -->

“This is what I didn’t get through to you when I said:

<!-- @segment sn42.2:3.3 -->

‘Enough, chief, let it be. Don’t ask me that.’”

<!-- @segment sn42.2:3.4 -->

“Sir, I’m not crying because of what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment sn42.2:3.5 -->

But sir, for a long time I’ve been cheated, tricked, and deceived by the dancers of the past who were tutors of tutors, who said:

<!-- @segment sn42.2:3.6 -->

‘Suppose a dancer entertains and amuses people on a stage or at a festival with mixed truth and lies. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of laughing gods.’

<!-- @segment sn42.2:3.7 -->

Excellent, sir! Excellent!

<!-- @segment sn42.2:3.8 -->

As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, the Buddha has made the teaching clear in many ways.

<!-- @segment sn42.2:3.9 -->

I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment sn42.2:3.10 -->

Sir, may I receive the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha’s presence?”

<!-- @segment sn42.2:3.11 -->

And Tālapuṭa the dancing chief received the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha’s presence.

<!-- @segment sn42.2:3.12 -->

Not long after his ordination, Venerable Tālapuṭa

<!-- @segment sn42.2:3.13 -->

became one of the perfected.
