---
slug: sn45.8
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Analysis
---

<!-- @segment sn45.8:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, I will teach and analyze for you the noble eightfold path.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:1.3 -->

Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment sn45.8:1.4 -->

“Yes, sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:1.5 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment sn45.8:2.1 -->

“And what is the noble eightfold path?

<!-- @segment sn45.8:2.2 -->

It is right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:3.1 -->

And what is right view?

<!-- @segment sn45.8:3.2 -->

Knowing about suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:3.3 -->

This is called right view.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:4.1 -->

And what is right purpose?

<!-- @segment sn45.8:4.2 -->

It is the purpose of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:4.3 -->

This is called right purpose.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:5.1 -->

And what is right speech?

<!-- @segment sn45.8:5.2 -->

Refraining from speech that’s false, backbiting, harsh, or nonsensical.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:5.3 -->

This is called right speech.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:6.1 -->

And what is right action?

<!-- @segment sn45.8:6.2 -->

Refraining from killing living creatures, stealing, and unchastity.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:6.3 -->

This is called right action.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:7.1 -->

And what is right livelihood?

<!-- @segment sn45.8:7.2 -->

It’s when a noble disciple gives up wrong livelihood and earns a living by right livelihood.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:7.3 -->

This is called right livelihood.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:8.1 -->

And what is right effort?

<!-- @segment sn45.8:8.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:8.3 -->

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:8.4 -->

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have not arisen do arise.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:8.5 -->

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fulfilled by development.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:8.6 -->

This is called right effort.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:9.1 -->

And what is right mindfulness?

<!-- @segment sn45.8:9.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:9.3 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:9.4 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of the mind—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:9.5 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:9.6 -->

This is called right mindfulness.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:10.1 -->

And what is right immersion?

<!-- @segment sn45.8:10.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:10.3 -->

As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:10.4 -->

And with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’

<!-- @segment sn45.8:10.5 -->

With the giving up of pleasure and pain and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

<!-- @segment sn45.8:10.6 -->

This is called right immersion.”
