---
slug: sn45.160
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: A River
---

<!-- @segment sn45.160:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, suppose that, although the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east,

<!-- @segment sn45.160:1.2 -->

a large crowd were to come along with a spade and basket, saying:

<!-- @segment sn45.160:1.3 -->

‘We’ll make this Ganges river slant, slope, and incline to the west!’

<!-- @segment sn45.160:1.4 -->

What do you think, mendicants?

<!-- @segment sn45.160:1.5 -->

Would they succeed?”

<!-- @segment sn45.160:1.6 -->

“No, sir.

<!-- @segment sn45.160:1.7 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment sn45.160:1.8 -->

The Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east.

<!-- @segment sn45.160:1.9 -->

It’s not easy to make it slant, slope, and incline to the west.

<!-- @segment sn45.160:1.10 -->

That large crowd will eventually get weary and frustrated.”

<!-- @segment sn45.160:1.11 -->

“In the same way, while a mendicant develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path, if rulers or their chief ministers, friends or colleagues, relatives or kin should invite them to accept wealth, saying:

<!-- @segment sn45.160:1.12 -->

‘Please, my man, why let these ocher robes torment you?

<!-- @segment sn45.160:1.13 -->

Why follow the practice of shaving your head and carrying an alms bowl?

<!-- @segment sn45.160:1.14 -->

Come, return to a lesser life, enjoy wealth, and make merit!’

<!-- @segment sn45.160:1.15 -->

It is quite impossible for a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path to resign the training and return to a lesser life.

<!-- @segment sn45.160:1.16 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment sn45.160:1.17 -->

Because for a long time that mendicant’s mind has slanted, sloped, and inclined to seclusion. So it’s impossible for them to return to a lesser life.

<!-- @segment sn45.160:1.18 -->

And how does a mendicant develop the noble eightfold path?

<!-- @segment sn45.160:1.19 -->

It’s when a mendicant develops right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.

<!-- @segment sn45.160:1.20 -->

That’s how a mendicant develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path.”

<!-- @segment sn45.160:1.21 -->



<!-- @segment sn45.160:1.22 -->



<!-- @segment sn45.160:1.23 -->



<!-- @segment sn45.160:2.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn45.160:2.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn45.160:2.3 -->
