---
slug: sn45.5
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: What’s the Goal?
---

<!-- @segment sn45.5:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn45.5:1.2 -->

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha … and said to him:

<!-- @segment sn45.5:2.1 -->

“Sir, sometimes wanderers of other religions ask us:

<!-- @segment sn45.5:2.2 -->

‘Reverends, what’s the goal of leading the spiritual life under the ascetic Gotama?’

<!-- @segment sn45.5:2.3 -->

We answer them like this:

<!-- @segment sn45.5:2.4 -->

‘The goal of leading the spiritual life under the Buddha is to completely understand suffering.’

<!-- @segment sn45.5:2.5 -->

Answering this way, we trust that we repeat what the Buddha has said, and don’t misrepresent him with an untruth. We trust our explanation is in line with the teaching, and that there are no legitimate grounds for rebuttal or criticism.”

<!-- @segment sn45.5:3.1 -->

“Indeed, in answering this way you repeat what I’ve said, and don’t misrepresent me with an untruth. Your explanation is in line with the teaching, and there are no legitimate grounds for rebuttal or criticism.

<!-- @segment sn45.5:3.2 -->

For the goal of leading the spiritual life under me is to completely understand suffering.

<!-- @segment sn45.5:3.3 -->

If wanderers of other religions were to ask you:

<!-- @segment sn45.5:3.4 -->

‘Is there a path and a practice for completely understanding that suffering?’ You should answer them like this:

<!-- @segment sn45.5:3.5 -->

‘There is.’

<!-- @segment sn45.5:4.1 -->

And what is that path?

<!-- @segment sn45.5:4.2 -->

It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:

<!-- @segment sn45.5:4.3 -->

right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

<!-- @segment sn45.5:4.4 -->

This is the path and the practice for completely understanding suffering.

<!-- @segment sn45.5:4.5 -->

When questioned by wanderers of other religions, that’s how you should answer them.”
