---
slug: sn45.159
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: A Guest House
description: The Buddha teaches on the noble eightfold path regarding a guest house, guiding mendicants to develop right view through right immersion on the path to liberation.
qualities: direct knowledge, discernment, mindfulness, right effort, right livelihood, right speech
theme: principle, directly knowing
---

<!-- @segment sn45.159:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, suppose there was a guest house. Lodgers come from the east, west, north, and south. Aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and menials all stay there.

<!-- @segment sn45.159:1.2 -->

In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path completely understands by direct knowledge the things that should be completely understood by direct knowledge.

<!-- @segment sn45.159:1.3 -->

They give up by direct knowledge the things that should be given up by direct knowledge. They realize by direct knowledge the things that should be realized by direct knowledge. They develop by direct knowledge the things that should be developed by direct knowledge.

<!-- @segment sn45.159:2.1 -->

And what are the things that should be completely understood by direct knowledge?

<!-- @segment sn45.159:2.2 -->

It should be said: the five grasping aggregates.

<!-- @segment sn45.159:2.3 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment sn45.159:2.4 -->

That is: form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn45.159:2.5 -->

These are the things that should be completely understood by direct knowledge.

<!-- @segment sn45.159:2.6 -->

And what are the things that should be given up by direct knowledge?

<!-- @segment sn45.159:2.7 -->

Ignorance and craving for continued existence.

<!-- @segment sn45.159:2.8 -->

These are the things that should be given up by direct knowledge.

<!-- @segment sn45.159:2.9 -->

And what are the things that should be realized by direct knowledge?

<!-- @segment sn45.159:2.10 -->

Knowledge and freedom.

<!-- @segment sn45.159:2.11 -->

These are the things that should be realized by direct knowledge.

<!-- @segment sn45.159:2.12 -->

And what are the things that should be developed by direct knowledge?

<!-- @segment sn45.159:2.13 -->

Serenity and discernment.

<!-- @segment sn45.159:2.14 -->

These are the things that should be developed by direct knowledge.

<!-- @segment sn45.159:2.15 -->

And how does a mendicant develop the noble eightfold path in this way?

<!-- @segment sn45.159:2.16 -->

It’s when a mendicant develops right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.

<!-- @segment sn45.159:2.17 -->

That’s how a mendicant develops and cultivates the eightfold path in this way.”
