---
slug: sn45.2
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Half the Spiritual Life
---

<!-- @segment sn45.2:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn45.2:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, where they have a town named Townsville.

<!-- @segment sn45.2:1.3 -->

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

<!-- @segment sn45.2:1.4 -->

“Sir, good friends, companions, and associates are half the spiritual life.”

<!-- @segment sn45.2:2.1 -->

“Not so, Ānanda! Not so, Ānanda!

<!-- @segment sn45.2:2.2 -->

Good friends, companions, and associates are the whole of the spiritual life.

<!-- @segment sn45.2:2.3 -->

A mendicant with good friends, companions, and associates can expect to develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path.

<!-- @segment sn45.2:3.1 -->

And how does a mendicant with good friends develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path?

<!-- @segment sn45.2:3.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant develops right view, which relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as letting go.

<!-- @segment sn45.2:3.3 -->

They develop right purpose …

<!-- @segment sn45.2:3.4 -->

right speech …

<!-- @segment sn45.2:3.5 -->

right action …

<!-- @segment sn45.2:3.6 -->

right livelihood …

<!-- @segment sn45.2:3.7 -->

right effort …

<!-- @segment sn45.2:3.8 -->

right mindfulness …

<!-- @segment sn45.2:3.9 -->

right immersion, which relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as letting go.

<!-- @segment sn45.2:3.10 -->

That’s how a mendicant with good friends develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path.

<!-- @segment sn45.2:4.1 -->

And here’s another way to understand how good friends are the whole of the spiritual life.

<!-- @segment sn45.2:4.2 -->

For, by relying on me as a good friend, sentient beings who are liable to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are freed from all these things.

<!-- @segment sn45.2:4.3 -->

This is another way to understand how good friends are the whole of the spiritual life.”
