---
slug: sn45.12
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Meditation (2nd)
---

<!-- @segment sn45.12:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn45.12:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, I wish to go on retreat for three months.

<!-- @segment sn45.12:1.3 -->

No-one should approach me, except for the one who brings my almsfood.”

<!-- @segment sn45.12:1.4 -->

“Yes, sir,” replied those mendicants. And no-one approached him, except for the one who brought the almsfood.

<!-- @segment sn45.12:2.1 -->

Then after three months had passed, the Buddha came out of retreat and addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment sn45.12:2.2 -->

“Mendicants, I’ve been practicing part of the meditation I practiced when I was first awakened.

<!-- @segment sn45.12:2.3 -->

I understand that

<!-- @segment sn45.12:2.4 -->

there’s feeling conditioned by wrong view

<!-- @segment sn45.12:2.5 -->

and by the settling of wrong view,

<!-- @segment sn45.12:2.6 -->

by right view

<!-- @segment sn45.12:2.7 -->

and by the settling of right view. …

<!-- @segment sn45.12:2.8 -->

There’s feeling conditioned by wrong immersion

<!-- @segment sn45.12:2.9 -->

and by the settling of wrong immersion, by right immersion

<!-- @segment sn45.12:2.10 -->

and by the settling of right immersion.

<!-- @segment sn45.12:2.11 -->

There’s feeling conditioned by desire

<!-- @segment sn45.12:2.12 -->

and by the settling of desire.

<!-- @segment sn45.12:2.13 -->

There’s feeling conditioned by thought,

<!-- @segment sn45.12:2.14 -->

and by the settling of thought.

<!-- @segment sn45.12:2.15 -->

There’s feeling conditioned by perception,

<!-- @segment sn45.12:2.16 -->

and by the settling of perception.

<!-- @segment sn45.12:2.17 -->

As long as desire, thought, and perception are not stilled, there is feeling conditioned by that.

<!-- @segment sn45.12:2.18 -->

When desire, thought, and perception are stilled, there is feeling conditioned by that.

<!-- @segment sn45.12:2.19 -->

There is effort to attain the unattained. When that state has been attained, there is also feeling conditioned by that.”
