---
slug: sn46.39
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Trees
---

<!-- @segment sn46.39:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, there are large trees with tiny seeds and big bodies, which grow up and around other trees as parasites. The trees they engulf break apart, collapse, and fall.

<!-- @segment sn46.39:1.2 -->

And what are those large trees with tiny seeds and big bodies?

<!-- @segment sn46.39:1.3 -->

The peepal, banyan, wavy leaf fig, cluster fig, Moreton Bay fig, and white fig.

<!-- @segment sn46.39:1.4 -->

These are the large trees with tiny seeds and big bodies, which grow up and around other trees as parasites. The trees they engulf break apart, collapse, and fall.

<!-- @segment sn46.39:1.5 -->

In the same way, take a certain gentleman who has gone forth from the lay life to homelessness, abandoning sensual pleasures. But beset by sensual pleasures that are similar, or even worse, he breaks apart, collapses, and falls.

<!-- @segment sn46.39:2.1 -->

There are these five obstacles and hindrances, parasites of the mind that weaken wisdom.

<!-- @segment sn46.39:2.2 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment sn46.39:2.3 -->

Sensual desire,

<!-- @segment sn46.39:2.4 -->

ill will,

<!-- @segment sn46.39:2.5 -->

dullness and drowsiness,

<!-- @segment sn46.39:2.6 -->

restlessness and remorse,

<!-- @segment sn46.39:2.7 -->

and doubt.

<!-- @segment sn46.39:2.8 -->

These are the five obstacles and hindrances, parasites of the mind that weaken wisdom.

<!-- @segment sn46.39:3.1 -->

These seven awakening factors are not obstacles, hindrances, or parasites of the mind. When developed and cultivated they lead to the realization of the fruit of knowledge and freedom.

<!-- @segment sn46.39:3.2 -->

What seven?

<!-- @segment sn46.39:3.3 -->

The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity.

<!-- @segment sn46.39:3.4 -->

These seven awakening factors are not obstacles, hindrances, or parasites of the mind. When developed and cultivated they lead to the realization of the fruit of knowledge and freedom.”
