---
slug: sn46.4
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Clothes
---

<!-- @segment sn46.4:1.1 -->

At one time Venerable Sāriputta was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment sn46.4:1.2 -->

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment sn46.4:1.3 -->

“Reverends, mendicants!”

<!-- @segment sn46.4:1.4 -->

“Reverend,” they replied.

<!-- @segment sn46.4:1.5 -->

Sāriputta said this:

<!-- @segment sn46.4:2.1 -->

“There are these seven awakening factors.

<!-- @segment sn46.4:2.2 -->

What seven?

<!-- @segment sn46.4:2.3 -->

The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity.

<!-- @segment sn46.4:2.4 -->

These are the seven awakening factors.

<!-- @segment sn46.4:2.5 -->

In the morning, I meditate on whichever of these seven awakening factors I want.

<!-- @segment sn46.4:2.6 -->

At midday,

<!-- @segment sn46.4:2.7 -->

and in the evening, I meditate on whichever of these seven awakening factors I want.

<!-- @segment sn46.4:2.8 -->

If it’s the awakening factor of mindfulness, I know that it’s limitless and that it’s properly implemented. While it remains I understand that it remains.

<!-- @segment sn46.4:2.9 -->

And if it subsides in me I understand the specific reason it subsides. …

<!-- @segment sn46.4:2.10 -->

If it’s the awakening factor of equanimity, I know that it’s limitless and that it’s properly implemented. While it remains I understand that it remains.

<!-- @segment sn46.4:2.11 -->

And if it subsides I understand the specific reason it subsides.

<!-- @segment sn46.4:3.1 -->

Suppose that a ruler or their chief minister had a chest full of garments of different colors.

<!-- @segment sn46.4:3.2 -->

In the morning, they’d don whatever pair of garments they wanted.

<!-- @segment sn46.4:3.3 -->

At midday,

<!-- @segment sn46.4:3.4 -->

and in the evening, they’d don whatever pair of garments they wanted.

<!-- @segment sn46.4:3.5 -->

In the same way, in the morning,

<!-- @segment sn46.4:3.6 -->

at midday,

<!-- @segment sn46.4:3.7 -->

and in the evening, I meditate on whichever of these seven awakening factors I want.

<!-- @segment sn46.4:3.8 -->

If it’s the awakening factor of mindfulness, I know that it’s limitless and that it’s properly implemented. While it remains I understand that it remains.

<!-- @segment sn46.4:3.9 -->

And if it subsides I understand the specific reason it subsides. …

<!-- @segment sn46.4:3.10 -->

If it’s the awakening factor of equanimity, I know that it’s limitless and that it’s properly implemented. While it remains I understand that it remains.

<!-- @segment sn46.4:3.11 -->

And if it subsides I understand the specific reason it subsides.”
