---
slug: sn46.2
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Body
---

<!-- @segment sn46.2:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:1.2 -->

“Mendicants, this body is sustained by food. It depends on food to continue, and without food it doesn’t continue.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:1.3 -->

In the same way, the five hindrances are sustained by fuel. They depend on fuel to continue, and without fuel they don’t continue.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:2.1 -->

And what fuels the arising of sensual desire, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow?

<!-- @segment sn46.2:2.2 -->

There is the feature of beauty.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:2.3 -->

Frequent irrational application of mind to that

<!-- @segment sn46.2:2.4 -->

fuels the arising of sensual desire, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:3.1 -->

And what fuels the arising of ill will, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow?

<!-- @segment sn46.2:3.2 -->

There is the feature of aversion.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:3.3 -->

Frequent irrational application of mind to that

<!-- @segment sn46.2:3.4 -->

fuels the arising of ill will, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:4.1 -->

And what fuels the arising of dullness and drowsiness, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase and grow?

<!-- @segment sn46.2:4.2 -->

There is discontent, sloth, yawning, sleepiness after eating, and mental sluggishness.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:4.3 -->

Frequent irrational application of mind to them

<!-- @segment sn46.2:4.4 -->

fuels the arising of dullness and drowsiness, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase and grow.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:5.1 -->

And what fuels the arising of restlessness and remorse, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase and grow?

<!-- @segment sn46.2:5.2 -->

There is the unsettled mind.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:5.3 -->

Frequent irrational application of mind to that

<!-- @segment sn46.2:5.4 -->

fuels the arising of restlessness and remorse, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase and grow.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:6.1 -->

And what fuels the arising of doubt, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow?

<!-- @segment sn46.2:6.2 -->

There are things that are grounds for doubt.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:6.3 -->

Frequent irrational application of mind to them

<!-- @segment sn46.2:6.4 -->

fuels the arising of doubt, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:7.1 -->

This body is sustained by food. It depends on food to continue, and without food it doesn’t continue.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:7.2 -->

In the same way, the five hindrances are sustained by fuel. They depend on fuel to continue, and without fuel they don’t continue.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:8.1 -->

This body is sustained by food. It depends on food to continue, and without food it doesn’t continue.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:8.2 -->

In the same way, the seven awakening factors are sustained by fuel. They depend on fuel to continue, and without fuel they don’t continue.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:9.1 -->

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of mindfulness, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it?

<!-- @segment sn46.2:9.2 -->

There are things that are grounds for the awakening factor of mindfulness.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:9.3 -->

Frequent rational application of mind to them

<!-- @segment sn46.2:9.4 -->

fuels the arising of the awakening factor of mindfulness, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:10.1 -->

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of investigation of principles, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it?

<!-- @segment sn46.2:10.2 -->

There are qualities that are skillful and unskillful, blameworthy and blameless, inferior and superior, and those with a portion of dark or bright.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:10.3 -->

Frequent rational application of mind to them

<!-- @segment sn46.2:10.4 -->

fuels the arising of the awakening factor of investigation of principles, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:11.1 -->

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of energy, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it?

<!-- @segment sn46.2:11.2 -->

There are the elements of initiative, persistence, and exertion.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:11.3 -->

Frequent rational application of mind to them

<!-- @segment sn46.2:11.4 -->

fuels the arising of the awakening factor of energy, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:12.1 -->

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of rapture, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it?

<!-- @segment sn46.2:12.2 -->

There are things that are grounds for the awakening factor of rapture.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:12.3 -->

Frequent rational application of mind to them

<!-- @segment sn46.2:12.4 -->

fuels the arising of the awakening factor of rapture, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:13.1 -->

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of tranquility, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it?

<!-- @segment sn46.2:13.2 -->

There is tranquility of the body and of the mind.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:13.3 -->

Frequent rational application of mind to that

<!-- @segment sn46.2:13.4 -->

fuels the arising of the awakening factor of tranquility, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:14.1 -->

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of immersion, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it?

<!-- @segment sn46.2:14.2 -->

There are things that are the basis of serenity and freedom from distraction.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:14.3 -->

Frequent rational application of mind to them

<!-- @segment sn46.2:14.4 -->

fuels the arising of the awakening factor of immersion, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:15.1 -->

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of equanimity, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it?

<!-- @segment sn46.2:15.2 -->

There are things that are grounds for the awakening factor of equanimity.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:15.3 -->

Frequent rational application of mind to them

<!-- @segment sn46.2:15.4 -->

fuels the arising of the awakening factor of equanimity, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:16.1 -->

This body is sustained by food. It depends on food to continue, and without food it doesn’t continue.

<!-- @segment sn46.2:16.2 -->

In the same way, the seven awakening factors are sustained by fuel. They depend on fuel to continue, and without fuel they don’t continue.”
