---
slug: sn46.56
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Prince Abhaya
description: The Buddha teaches how a mendicant develops the seven awakening factors—mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity—depending on and grounded on ethics, relying on seclusion, fading away, and cessation.
qualities: equanimity, mindfulness, doubt, sensual desire, desire, ending
theme: training guideline, principle
---

<!-- @segment sn46.56:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn46.56:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain.

<!-- @segment sn46.56:1.3 -->

Then Prince Abhaya went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

<!-- @segment sn46.56:1.4 -->

“Sir, Pūraṇa Kassapa says this:

<!-- @segment sn46.56:1.5 -->

‘There is no cause or reason for not knowing and not seeing.

<!-- @segment sn46.56:1.6 -->

Not knowing and not seeing have no cause or reason.

<!-- @segment sn46.56:1.7 -->

There is no cause or reason for knowing and seeing.

<!-- @segment sn46.56:1.8 -->

Knowing and seeing have no cause or reason.’

<!-- @segment sn46.56:1.9 -->

What does the Buddha say about this?”

<!-- @segment sn46.56:1.10 -->

“Prince, there are causes and reasons for not knowing and not seeing.

<!-- @segment sn46.56:1.11 -->

Not knowing and not seeing have causes and reasons.

<!-- @segment sn46.56:1.12 -->

There are causes and reasons for knowing and seeing.

<!-- @segment sn46.56:1.13 -->

Knowing and seeing have causes and reasons.”

<!-- @segment sn46.56:2.1 -->

“But sir, what is the cause and reason for not knowing and not seeing?

<!-- @segment sn46.56:2.2 -->

How do not knowing and not seeing have causes and reasons?”

<!-- @segment sn46.56:2.3 -->

“There’s a time when the heart is overcome and mired in sensual desire, without truly knowing and seeing the escape from sensual desire that has arisen.

<!-- @segment sn46.56:2.4 -->

This is a cause and reason for not knowing and not seeing.

<!-- @segment sn46.56:2.5 -->

And this is how not knowing and not seeing have causes and reasons.

<!-- @segment sn46.56:3.1 -->

Furthermore, there’s a time when the heart is overcome and mired in ill will …

<!-- @segment sn46.56:3.2 -->

dullness and drowsiness …

<!-- @segment sn46.56:3.3 -->

restlessness and remorse …

<!-- @segment sn46.56:3.4 -->

doubt, without truly knowing and seeing the escape from doubt that has arisen.

<!-- @segment sn46.56:3.5 -->

This is a cause and reason for not knowing and not seeing.

<!-- @segment sn46.56:3.6 -->

And this is how not knowing and not seeing have causes and reasons.”

<!-- @segment sn46.56:4.1 -->

“Sir, what is the name of this exposition of the teaching?”

<!-- @segment sn46.56:4.2 -->

“These are called the ‘hindrances’, prince.”

<!-- @segment sn46.56:4.3 -->

“Indeed, Blessed One, these are hindrances!

<!-- @segment sn46.56:4.4 -->

Indeed, Holy One, these are hindrances!

<!-- @segment sn46.56:4.5 -->

Overcome by even a single hindrance you wouldn’t truly know or see, let alone all five hindrances.

<!-- @segment sn46.56:5.1 -->

But sir, what is the cause and reason for knowing and seeing?

<!-- @segment sn46.56:5.2 -->

How do knowing and seeing have causes and reasons?”

<!-- @segment sn46.56:5.3 -->

“It’s when a mendicant develops the awakening factor of mindfulness, which relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as letting go.

<!-- @segment sn46.56:5.4 -->

They truly know and see with a mind that has developed the awakening factor of mindfulness.

<!-- @segment sn46.56:5.5 -->

This is a cause and reason for knowing and seeing.

<!-- @segment sn46.56:5.6 -->

And this is how knowing and seeing have causes and reasons.

<!-- @segment sn46.56:6.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant develops the awakening factor of investigation of principles … energy … rapture … tranquility … immersion …

<!-- @segment sn46.56:6.2 -->

equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.

<!-- @segment sn46.56:6.3 -->

They truly know and see with a mind that has developed the awakening factor of equanimity.

<!-- @segment sn46.56:6.4 -->

This is a cause and reason for knowing and seeing.

<!-- @segment sn46.56:6.5 -->

And this is how knowing and seeing have causes and reasons.”

<!-- @segment sn46.56:7.1 -->

“Sir, what is the name of this exposition of the teaching?”

<!-- @segment sn46.56:7.2 -->

“These are called the ‘awakening factors’, prince.”

<!-- @segment sn46.56:7.3 -->

“Indeed, Blessed One, these are awakening factors!

<!-- @segment sn46.56:7.4 -->

Indeed, Holy One, these are awakening factors!

<!-- @segment sn46.56:7.5 -->

Endowed with even a single awakening factor you would truly know and see, let alone all seven awakening factors.

<!-- @segment sn46.56:7.6 -->

When climbing Mount Vulture’s Peak I became fatigued in body and mind. But this has now faded away. And I’ve comprehended the teaching.”

<!-- @segment sn46.56:7.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.56:7.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.56:8.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.56:8.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.56:8.3 -->
