---
slug: sn46.54
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Full of Love
description: The Buddha teaches on the five hindrances and the seven awakening factors regarding full of love, showing how hindrances are fueled and awakening factors are nourished through application of mind.
qualities: liberation, desire, equanimity, affection, compassion, mindfulness
theme: training guideline, story
---

<!-- @segment sn46.54:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Koliyans, where they have a town named Haliddavasana.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:1.2 -->

Then several mendicants robed up in the morning and, taking their bowls and robes, entered Haliddavasana for alms.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:1.3 -->

Then it occurred to them,

<!-- @segment sn46.54:1.4 -->

“It’s too early to wander for alms in Haliddavasana.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:1.5 -->

Why don’t we visit the monastery of the wanderers of other religions?”

<!-- @segment sn46.54:2.1 -->

Then they went to the monastery of the wanderers of other religions and exchanged greetings with the wanderers there.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:2.2 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side. The wanderers said to them:

<!-- @segment sn46.54:3.1 -->

“Reverends, the ascetic Gotama teaches his disciples like this:

<!-- @segment sn46.54:3.2 -->

‘Come, mendicants, give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom, and meditate spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, spread a heart full of love to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:3.3 -->

Meditate spreading a heart full of compassion to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, spread a heart full of compassion to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:3.4 -->

Meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, spread a heart full of rejoicing to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:3.5 -->

Meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.’

<!-- @segment sn46.54:4.1 -->

We too teach our disciples in just the same way.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:4.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.54:4.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.54:4.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.54:4.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.54:4.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.54:4.7 -->

What, then, is the difference between the ascetic Gotama’s teaching and instruction and ours?”

<!-- @segment sn46.54:5.1 -->

Those mendicants neither approved nor rejected that statement of the wanderers of other religions.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:5.2 -->

They rose from their seat, thinking:

<!-- @segment sn46.54:5.3 -->

“We will learn the meaning of this statement from the Buddha himself.”

<!-- @segment sn46.54:5.4 -->

Then, after the meal, when they returned from almsround, they went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:6.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.54:6.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.54:6.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.54:7.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.54:7.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.54:8.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.54:8.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.54:8.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.54:8.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.54:8.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.54:9.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.54:9.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.54:9.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.54:9.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.54:9.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.54:9.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.54:10.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.54:10.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.54:11.1 -->

“Mendicants, when wanderers of other religions say this, you should say to them:

<!-- @segment sn46.54:11.2 -->

‘But reverends, how is the heart’s release by love developed? What is its destination, apex, fruit, and culmination?

<!-- @segment sn46.54:11.3 -->

How is the heart’s release by compassion developed? What is its destination, apex, fruit, and end?

<!-- @segment sn46.54:11.4 -->

How is the heart’s release by rejoicing developed? What is its destination, apex, fruit, and end?

<!-- @segment sn46.54:11.5 -->

How is the heart’s release by equanimity developed? What is its destination, apex, fruit, and end?’

<!-- @segment sn46.54:11.6 -->

Questioned like this, the wanderers of other religions would be stumped, and, in addition, would get frustrated.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:11.7 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment sn46.54:11.8 -->

Because they’re out of their element.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:11.9 -->

I don’t see anyone in this world—with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans—who could provide a satisfying answer to these questions except for the Realized One or his disciple or someone who has heard it from them.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:12.1 -->

And how is the heart’s release by love developed? What is its destination, apex, fruit, and end?

<!-- @segment sn46.54:12.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant develops the heart’s release by love together with the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion,

<!-- @segment sn46.54:12.3 -->

and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:12.4 -->

If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:12.5 -->

If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive,’ that’s what they do.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:12.6 -->

If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive and the repulsive,’ that’s what they do.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:12.7 -->

If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive and the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:12.8 -->

If they wish: ‘May I meditate staying equanimous, mindful and aware, shunning both the repulsive and the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:12.9 -->

The apex of the heart’s release by love is the beautiful, I say, for a wise mendicant here who has not penetrated to a higher freedom.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:13.1 -->

And how is the heart’s release by compassion developed? What is its destination, apex, fruit, and end?

<!-- @segment sn46.54:13.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant develops the heart’s release by compassion together with the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion,

<!-- @segment sn46.54:13.3 -->

and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:13.4 -->

If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do. …

<!-- @segment sn46.54:13.5 -->

If they wish: ‘May I meditate staying equanimous, mindful and aware, shunning both the repulsive and the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:13.6 -->

Or else, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite space.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:13.7 -->

The apex of the heart’s release by compassion is the dimension of infinite space, I say, for a wise mendicant here who has not penetrated to a higher freedom.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:14.1 -->

And how is the heart’s release by rejoicing developed? What is its destination, apex, fruit, and end?

<!-- @segment sn46.54:14.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant develops the heart’s release by rejoicing together with the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion,

<!-- @segment sn46.54:14.3 -->

and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:14.4 -->

If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do. …

<!-- @segment sn46.54:14.5 -->

If they wish: ‘May I meditate staying equanimous, mindful and aware, shunning both the repulsive and the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:14.6 -->

Or else, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:14.7 -->

The apex of the heart’s release by rejoicing is the dimension of infinite consciousness, I say, for a wise mendicant here who has not penetrated to a higher freedom.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:15.1 -->

And how is the heart’s release by equanimity developed? What is its destination, apex, fruit, and end?

<!-- @segment sn46.54:15.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant develops the heart’s release by equanimity together with the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion,

<!-- @segment sn46.54:15.3 -->

and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:15.4 -->

If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:15.5 -->

If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive,’ that’s what they do.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:15.6 -->

If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive and the repulsive,’ that’s what they do.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:15.7 -->

If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive and the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:15.8 -->

If they wish: ‘May I meditate staying equanimous, mindful and aware, shunning both the repulsive and the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:15.9 -->

Or else, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, they enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness.

<!-- @segment sn46.54:15.10 -->

The apex of the heart’s release by equanimity is the dimension of nothingness, I say, for a wise mendicant here who has not penetrated to a higher freedom.”
