---
slug: sn46.52
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Is There a Way?
---

<!-- @segment sn46.52:1.1 -->

Then several mendicants robed up in the morning and, taking their bowls and robes, entered Sāvatthī for alms.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:1.2 -->

Then it occurred to him,

<!-- @segment sn46.52:1.3 -->

“It’s too early to wander for alms in Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:1.4 -->

Why don’t we visit the monastery of the wanderers of other religions?”

<!-- @segment sn46.52:2.1 -->

Then they went to the monastery of the wanderers of other religions and exchanged greetings with the wanderers there.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:2.2 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side. The wanderers said to them:

<!-- @segment sn46.52:3.1 -->

“Reverends, the ascetic Gotama teaches his disciples like this:

<!-- @segment sn46.52:3.2 -->

‘Mendicants, please give up the five hindrances—corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom—and truly develop the seven awakening factors.’

<!-- @segment sn46.52:3.3 -->

We too teach our disciples:

<!-- @segment sn46.52:3.4 -->

‘Reverends, please give up the five hindrances—corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom—and truly develop the seven awakening factors.’

<!-- @segment sn46.52:3.5 -->

What, then, is the difference between the ascetic Gotama’s teaching and instruction and ours?”

<!-- @segment sn46.52:4.1 -->

Those mendicants neither approved nor rejected that statement of the wanderers of other religions.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:4.2 -->

They rose from their seat, thinking:

<!-- @segment sn46.52:4.3 -->

“We will learn the meaning of this statement from the Buddha himself.”

<!-- @segment sn46.52:4.4 -->

Then, after the meal, when they returned from almsround, they went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:5.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.52:5.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.52:5.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.52:5.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.52:5.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.52:5.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.52:6.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.52:6.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.52:6.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.52:6.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.52:7.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.52:7.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn46.52:8.1 -->

“Mendicants, when wanderers of other religions say this, you should say to them:

<!-- @segment sn46.52:8.2 -->

‘But reverends, is there a way in which the five hindrances become ten and the seven awakening factors become fourteen?’

<!-- @segment sn46.52:8.3 -->

Questioned like this, the wanderers of other religions would be stumped, and, in addition, would get frustrated.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:8.4 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment sn46.52:8.5 -->

Because they’re out of their element.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:8.6 -->

I don’t see anyone in this world—with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans—who could provide a satisfying answer to these questions except for the Realized One or his disciple or someone who has heard it from them.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:9.1 -->

And what is the way in which the five hindrances become ten?

<!-- @segment sn46.52:9.2 -->

Sensual desire for what is internal is a hindrance; and sensual desire for what is external is also a hindrance.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:9.3 -->

That’s how what is concisely referred to as ‘the hindrance of sensual desire’ becomes twofold.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:9.4 -->

Ill will for what is internal is a hindrance; and ill will for what is external is also a hindrance.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:9.5 -->

That’s how what is concisely referred to as ‘the hindrance of ill will’ becomes twofold.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:9.6 -->

Dullness is a hindrance; and drowsiness is also a hindrance.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:9.7 -->

That’s how what is concisely referred to as ‘the hindrance of dullness and drowsiness’ becomes twofold.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:9.8 -->

Restlessness is a hindrance; and remorse is also a hindrance.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:9.9 -->

That’s how what is concisely referred to as ‘the hindrance of restlessness and remorse’ becomes twofold.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:9.10 -->

Doubt about internal things is a hindrance; and doubt about external things is also a hindrance.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:9.11 -->

That’s how what is concisely referred to as ‘the hindrance of doubt’ becomes twofold.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:9.12 -->

This is the way in which the five hindrances become ten.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:10.1 -->

And what is the way in which the seven awakening factors become fourteen?

<!-- @segment sn46.52:10.2 -->

Mindfulness of internal things is the awakening factor of mindfulness; and mindfulness of external things is also the awakening factor of mindfulness.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:10.3 -->

That’s how what is concisely referred to as ‘the awakening factor of mindfulness’ becomes twofold.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:11.1 -->

Investigating, exploring, and inquiring into internal things with wisdom is the awakening factor of investigation of principles; and investigating, exploring, and inquiring into external things with wisdom is also the awakening factor of investigation of principles.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:11.2 -->

That’s how what is concisely referred to as ‘the awakening factor of investigation of principles’ becomes twofold.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:12.1 -->

Physical energy is the awakening factor of energy; and mental energy is also the awakening factor of energy.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:12.2 -->

That’s how what is concisely referred to as ‘the awakening factor of energy’ becomes twofold.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:13.1 -->

Rapture while placing the mind and keeping it connected is the awakening factor of rapture; and rapture without placing the mind and keeping it connected is also the awakening factor of rapture.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:13.2 -->

In this way what is concisely referred to as ‘the awakening factor of rapture’ becomes twofold.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:14.1 -->

Physical tranquility is the awakening factor of tranquility; and mental tranquility is also the awakening factor of tranquility.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:14.2 -->

In this way what is concisely referred to as ‘the awakening factor of tranquility’ becomes twofold.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:15.1 -->

Immersion while placing the mind and keeping it connected is the awakening factor of immersion; and immersion without placing the mind and keeping it connected is also the awakening factor of immersion.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:15.2 -->

In this way what is concisely referred to as ‘the awakening factor of immersion’ becomes twofold.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:16.1 -->

Equanimity for internal things is the awakening factor of equanimity; and equanimity for external things is also the awakening factor of equanimity.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:16.2 -->

In this way what is concisely referred to as ‘the awakening factor of equanimity’ becomes twofold.

<!-- @segment sn46.52:16.3 -->

This is the way in which the seven awakening factors become fourteen.”
