---
slug: sn46.14
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Sick (1st)
---

<!-- @segment sn46.14:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground.

<!-- @segment sn46.14:1.2 -->

Now at that time Venerable Mahākassapa was staying in the Pipphali cave, and he was sick, suffering, gravely ill.

<!-- @segment sn46.14:1.3 -->

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat, went to Venerable Mahākassapa, sat down on the seat spread out, and said to him:

<!-- @segment sn46.14:2.1 -->

“I hope you’re keeping well, Kassapa; I hope you’re all right. And I hope the pain is fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not its growing.”

<!-- @segment sn46.14:2.2 -->

“Sir, I’m not keeping well, I’m not getting by. The pain is terrible and growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its fading.”

<!-- @segment sn46.14:3.1 -->

“Kassapa, I’ve rightly explained these seven awakening factors. When developed and cultivated, they lead to direct knowledge, to awakening, and to extinguishment.

<!-- @segment sn46.14:3.2 -->

What seven?

<!-- @segment sn46.14:3.3 -->

The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity.

<!-- @segment sn46.14:3.4 -->

These are the seven awakening factors that I’ve rightly explained. When developed and cultivated, they lead to direct knowledge, to awakening, and to extinguishment.”

<!-- @segment sn46.14:3.5 -->

“Indeed, Blessed One, these are awakening factors!

<!-- @segment sn46.14:3.6 -->

Indeed, Holy One, these are awakening factors!”

<!-- @segment sn46.14:4.1 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment sn46.14:4.2 -->

Satisfied, Venerable Mahākassapa approved what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment sn46.14:4.3 -->

And that’s how he recovered from that illness.

<!-- @segment sn46.14:4.4 -->
