---
slug: sn46.3
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Ethics
---

<!-- @segment sn46.3:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, when a mendicant is accomplished in ethics, immersion, knowledge, freedom, or the knowledge and vision of freedom, even the sight of them is very helpful, I say.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:1.2 -->

Even to hear them,

<!-- @segment sn46.3:1.3 -->

approach them,

<!-- @segment sn46.3:1.4 -->

pay homage to them,

<!-- @segment sn46.3:1.5 -->

recollect them,

<!-- @segment sn46.3:1.6 -->

or go forth following them is very helpful, I say.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:1.7 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment sn46.3:1.8 -->

Because after hearing the teaching of such mendicants, a mendicant will live withdrawn in both body and mind,

<!-- @segment sn46.3:1.9 -->

as they recollect and think about that teaching.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:2.1 -->

At such a time, a mendicant has initiated the awakening factor of mindfulness;

<!-- @segment sn46.3:2.2 -->

they develop it

<!-- @segment sn46.3:2.3 -->

and perfect it.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:2.4 -->

As they live mindfully in this way they investigate, explore, and inquire into that teaching with wisdom.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:3.1 -->

At such a time, a mendicant has initiated the awakening factor of investigation of principles;

<!-- @segment sn46.3:3.2 -->

they develop it

<!-- @segment sn46.3:3.3 -->

and perfect it.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:3.4 -->

As they investigate principles with wisdom in this way their energy is roused up and unflagging.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:4.1 -->

At such a time, a mendicant has initiated the awakening factor of energy; they develop it and perfect it.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:4.2 -->

When they’re energetic, rapture not of the flesh arises.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:5.1 -->

At such a time, a mendicant has initiated the awakening factor of rapture; they develop it and perfect it.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:5.2 -->

When the mind is full of rapture, the body and mind become tranquil.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:6.1 -->

At such a time, a mendicant has initiated the awakening factor of tranquility; they develop it and perfect it.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:6.2 -->

When the body is tranquil and one feels bliss, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:7.1 -->

At such a time, a mendicant has initiated the awakening factor of immersion; they develop it and perfect it.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:7.2 -->

They closely watch over that mind immersed in samādhi.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:8.1 -->

At such a time, a mendicant has initiated the awakening factor of equanimity; they develop it and perfect it.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:9.1 -->

When the seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated in this way they can expect seven fruits and benefits.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:9.2 -->

What seven?

<!-- @segment sn46.3:9.3 -->

They attain enlightenment early on in this very life.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:9.4 -->

If not, they attain enlightenment at the time of death.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:9.5 -->

If not, with the ending of the five lower fetters, they’re extinguished between one life and the next.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:9.6 -->

If not, with the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished upon landing.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:9.7 -->

If not, with the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished without extra effort.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:9.8 -->

If not, with the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished with extra effort.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:9.9 -->

If not, with the ending of the five lower fetters they head upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha realm.

<!-- @segment sn46.3:9.10 -->

When the seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated in this way these are the seven fruits and benefits they can expect.”
