---
slug: sn46.6
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Kuṇḍaliya
---

<!-- @segment sn46.6:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāketa in the deer park at the Añjana Wood.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:1.2 -->

Then the wanderer Kuṇḍaliya went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:1.3 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

<!-- @segment sn46.6:1.4 -->

“Worthy Gotama, I like to hang around the monasteries and visit the assemblies.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:1.5 -->

When I’ve finished breakfast, it’s my habit to

<!-- @segment sn46.6:1.6 -->

wander from monastery to monastery, from park to park.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:1.7 -->

There I see some ascetics and brahmins speaking for the sake of winning debates and finding fault.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:1.8 -->

But what benefit does the worthy Gotama live for?”

<!-- @segment sn46.6:1.9 -->

“The benefit the Realized One lives for, Kuṇḍaliya, is the fruit of knowledge and freedom.”

<!-- @segment sn46.6:2.1 -->

“But what things must be developed and cultivated in order to fulfill knowledge and freedom?”

<!-- @segment sn46.6:2.2 -->

“The seven awakening factors.”

<!-- @segment sn46.6:2.3 -->

“But what things must be developed and cultivated in order to fulfill the seven awakening factors?”

<!-- @segment sn46.6:2.4 -->

“The four kinds of mindfulness meditation.”

<!-- @segment sn46.6:2.5 -->

“But what things must be developed and cultivated in order to fulfill the four kinds of mindfulness meditation?”

<!-- @segment sn46.6:2.6 -->

“The three kinds of good conduct.”

<!-- @segment sn46.6:2.7 -->

“But what things must be developed and cultivated in order to fulfill the three kinds of good conduct?”

<!-- @segment sn46.6:2.8 -->

“Sense restraint.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:3.1 -->

And Kuṇḍaliya, how is sense restraint developed and cultivated so as to fulfill the three kinds of good conduct?

<!-- @segment sn46.6:3.2 -->

A mendicant sees an agreeable sight with their eye. They don’t desire it or enjoy it, and they don’t give rise to greed.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:3.3 -->

Their mind and body are steady internally, well settled and well freed.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:3.4 -->

But if they see a disagreeable sight they’re undismayed, with mind unirritated, spirit undaunted, and heart unangered.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:3.5 -->

Their mind and body are steady internally, well settled and well freed.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:4.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant hears an agreeable sound with the ear …

<!-- @segment sn46.6:4.2 -->

smells an agreeable odor with the nose …

<!-- @segment sn46.6:4.3 -->

tastes an agreeable flavor with the tongue …

<!-- @segment sn46.6:4.4 -->

encounters an agreeable touch with the body …

<!-- @segment sn46.6:4.5 -->

knows an agreeable idea with their mind. They don’t desire it or enjoy it, and they don’t give rise to greed.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:4.6 -->

Their mind and body are steady internally, well settled and well freed.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:4.7 -->

But if they know a disagreeable idea they’re undismayed, with mind unirritated, spirit undaunted, and heart unangered.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:4.8 -->

Their mind and body are steady internally, well settled and well freed.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:5.1 -->

When a mendicant’s mind and body are steady internally, they’re well settled and well freed when it comes to both agreeable and disagreeable sights,

<!-- @segment sn46.6:5.2 -->

sounds,

<!-- @segment sn46.6:5.3 -->

smells,

<!-- @segment sn46.6:5.4 -->

tastes,

<!-- @segment sn46.6:5.5 -->

touches,

<!-- @segment sn46.6:5.6 -->

and ideas.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:5.7 -->

That’s how sense restraint is developed and cultivated so as to fulfill the three kinds of good conduct.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:6.1 -->

And how are the three kinds of good conduct developed and cultivated so as to fulfill the four kinds of mindfulness meditation?

<!-- @segment sn46.6:6.2 -->

A mendicant gives up bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and develops good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:6.3 -->

That’s how the three kinds of good conduct are developed and cultivated so as to fulfill the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:7.1 -->

And how are the four kinds of mindfulness meditation developed and cultivated so as to fulfill the seven awakening factors?

<!-- @segment sn46.6:7.2 -->

A mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:7.3 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings …

<!-- @segment sn46.6:7.4 -->

mind …

<!-- @segment sn46.6:7.5 -->

principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:7.6 -->

That’s how the four kinds of mindfulness meditation are developed and cultivated so as to fulfill the seven awakening factors.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:8.1 -->

And how are the seven awakening factors developed and cultivated so as to fulfill knowledge and freedom?

<!-- @segment sn46.6:8.2 -->

A mendicant develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion,

<!-- @segment sn46.6:8.3 -->

and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:8.4 -->

That’s how the seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated so as to fulfill knowledge and freedom.”

<!-- @segment sn46.6:9.1 -->

When he said this, the wanderer Kuṇḍaliya said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment sn46.6:9.2 -->

“Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent!

<!-- @segment sn46.6:9.3 -->

As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, worthy Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:9.4 -->

I go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment sn46.6:9.5 -->

From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”
