---
slug: sn47.40
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Analysis
---

<!-- @segment sn47.40:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, I will teach you mindfulness meditation, the development of mindfulness meditation, and the practice that leads to the development of mindfulness meditation.

<!-- @segment sn47.40:1.2 -->

Listen …

<!-- @segment sn47.40:1.3 -->

And what is mindfulness meditation?

<!-- @segment sn47.40:1.4 -->

It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.40:1.5 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings …

<!-- @segment sn47.40:1.6 -->

mind …

<!-- @segment sn47.40:1.7 -->

principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.40:1.8 -->

This is called mindfulness meditation.

<!-- @segment sn47.40:2.1 -->

And what is the development of mindfulness meditation?

<!-- @segment sn47.40:2.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant, with respect to the body, meditates observing the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.40:2.3 -->

With respect to feelings …

<!-- @segment sn47.40:2.4 -->

mind …

<!-- @segment sn47.40:2.5 -->

principles, they meditate observing the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.40:2.6 -->

This is called the development of mindfulness meditation.

<!-- @segment sn47.40:3.1 -->

And what is the practice that leads to the development of mindfulness meditation?

<!-- @segment sn47.40:3.2 -->

It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:

<!-- @segment sn47.40:3.3 -->

right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

<!-- @segment sn47.40:3.4 -->

This is called the practice that leads to the development of mindfulness meditation.”

<!-- @segment sn47.40:3.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn47.40:3.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn47.40:4.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn47.40:4.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn47.40:4.3 -->
