---
slug: sn47.19
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: At Sedaka
---

<!-- @segment sn47.19:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sumbhas, near the town of the Sumbhas named Sedaka.

<!-- @segment sn47.19:1.2 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment sn47.19:1.3 -->

“Once upon a time, mendicants, a pole acrobat of the corpse-workers set up the bamboo pole of his tribe and said to his apprentice Medakathālikā,

<!-- @segment sn47.19:1.4 -->

‘Come now, dear Medakathālikā, climb up the bamboo pole and stand above my shoulders.’

<!-- @segment sn47.19:1.5 -->

‘Yes, tutor,’ she replied. She climbed up the bamboo pole and stood above her tutor’s shoulders.

<!-- @segment sn47.19:1.6 -->

Then the pole acrobat of the corpse-workers said to Medakathālikā,

<!-- @segment sn47.19:1.7 -->

‘You look after me, dear Medakathālikā, and I shall look after you.

<!-- @segment sn47.19:1.8 -->

That’s how, guarding and looking after each other, we’ll display our skill, collect our fee, and get down safely from the bamboo pole.’

<!-- @segment sn47.19:1.9 -->

When he said this, Medakathālikā said to her teacher,

<!-- @segment sn47.19:1.10 -->

‘That’s not how it will be, tutor!

<!-- @segment sn47.19:1.11 -->

You look after yourself, and I shall look after myself.

<!-- @segment sn47.19:1.12 -->

That’s how, guarding and looking after ourselves, we’ll display our skill, collect our fee, and get down safely from the bamboo pole.’

<!-- @segment sn47.19:2.1 -->

That’s the way,” said the Buddha. “It’s just as Medakathālikā said to her tutor.

<!-- @segment sn47.19:2.2 -->

Thinking ‘I’ll look after myself,’ you should cultivate mindfulness meditation.

<!-- @segment sn47.19:2.3 -->

Thinking ‘I’ll look after others,’ you should cultivate mindfulness meditation.

<!-- @segment sn47.19:2.4 -->

Looking after yourself, you look after others; and looking after others, you look after yourself.

<!-- @segment sn47.19:3.1 -->

And how do you look after others by looking after yourself?

<!-- @segment sn47.19:3.2 -->

By development, cultivation, and practice of meditation.

<!-- @segment sn47.19:3.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn47.19:3.4 -->

And how do you look after yourself by looking after others?

<!-- @segment sn47.19:3.5 -->

By acceptance, harmlessness, love, and sympathy.

<!-- @segment sn47.19:3.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn47.19:3.7 -->

Thinking ‘I’ll look after myself,’ you should cultivate mindfulness meditation.

<!-- @segment sn47.19:3.8 -->

Thinking ‘I’ll look after others,’ you should cultivate mindfulness meditation.

<!-- @segment sn47.19:3.9 -->

Looking after yourself, you look after others; and looking after others, you look after yourself.”
