---
slug: sn47.9
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Sick
---

<!-- @segment sn47.9:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn47.9:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the little village of Beluva.

<!-- @segment sn47.9:1.3 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment sn47.9:1.4 -->

“Mendicants, please enter the rainy season residence with whatever friends or acquaintances you have around Vesālī.

<!-- @segment sn47.9:1.5 -->

I’ll commence the rainy season residence right here in the little village of Beluva.”

<!-- @segment sn47.9:1.6 -->

“Yes, sir,” those mendicants replied. They did as the Buddha said,

<!-- @segment sn47.9:1.7 -->

while the Buddha commenced the rainy season residence right there in the little village of Beluva.

<!-- @segment sn47.9:2.1 -->

After the Buddha had commenced the rainy season residence, he fell severely ill, struck by dreadful pains, close to death.

<!-- @segment sn47.9:2.2 -->

But he endured unbothered, with mindfulness and situational awareness.

<!-- @segment sn47.9:2.3 -->

Then it occurred to the Buddha:

<!-- @segment sn47.9:2.4 -->

“It would not be appropriate for me to be fully extinguished before informing my supporters and taking leave of the mendicant Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment sn47.9:2.5 -->

Why don’t I forcefully suppress this illness, stabilize the life force, and live on?”

<!-- @segment sn47.9:2.6 -->

So that is what he did.

<!-- @segment sn47.9:2.7 -->

Then the Buddha’s illness died down.

<!-- @segment sn47.9:3.1 -->

Soon after the Buddha had recovered from that sickness, he left his dwelling and sat in the shade of the porch on the seat spread out.

<!-- @segment sn47.9:3.2 -->

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

<!-- @segment sn47.9:3.3 -->

“Sir, it’s fantastic that the Buddha is comfortable,

<!-- @segment sn47.9:3.4 -->

that he’s keeping well,

<!-- @segment sn47.9:3.5 -->

and that he’s getting by.

<!-- @segment sn47.9:3.6 -->

Because when the Buddha was sick, my body felt like it was drugged. I was disorientated, and the teachings didn’t spring to mind.

<!-- @segment sn47.9:3.7 -->

Still, at least I was consoled by the thought that

<!-- @segment sn47.9:3.8 -->

the Buddha won’t be fully extinguished without bringing something up regarding the Saṅgha of mendicants.”

<!-- @segment sn47.9:4.1 -->

“But what could the mendicant Saṅgha expect from me now, Ānanda?

<!-- @segment sn47.9:4.2 -->

I’ve taught the Dhamma without making any distinction between secret and public teachings.

<!-- @segment sn47.9:4.3 -->

The Realized One doesn’t have the closed fist of a tutor when it comes to the teachings.

<!-- @segment sn47.9:4.4 -->

If there’s anyone who thinks:

<!-- @segment sn47.9:4.5 -->

‘I shall lead the mendicant Saṅgha,’ or ‘the Saṅgha of mendicants is meant for me,’ let them bring something up regarding the Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment sn47.9:4.6 -->

But the Realized One doesn’t think like this,

<!-- @segment sn47.9:4.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn47.9:4.8 -->

so why should he bring something up regarding the Saṅgha?

<!-- @segment sn47.9:4.9 -->

Now I am old, elderly and senior. I’m advanced in years and have reached the final stage of life.

<!-- @segment sn47.9:4.10 -->

I’m currently eighty years old.

<!-- @segment sn47.9:4.11 -->

Just as a decrepit old cart is kept going by a rope,

<!-- @segment sn47.9:4.12 -->

in the same way, the Realized One’s body is kept going as if by a rope.

<!-- @segment sn47.9:5.1 -->

Sometimes the Realized One, not focusing on any signs, and with the cessation of certain feelings, enters and remains in the signless immersion of the heart. Only then does the Realized One’s body become more comfortable.

<!-- @segment sn47.9:5.2 -->

So Ānanda, live as your own island, your own refuge, with no other refuge. Let the teaching be your island and your refuge, with no other refuge.

<!-- @segment sn47.9:6.1 -->

And how does a mendicant do this?

<!-- @segment sn47.9:6.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.9:6.3 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings …

<!-- @segment sn47.9:6.4 -->

mind …

<!-- @segment sn47.9:6.5 -->

principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.9:6.6 -->

That’s how a mendicant lives as their own island, their own refuge, with no other refuge. That’s how the teaching is their island and their refuge, with no other refuge.

<!-- @segment sn47.9:6.7 -->

Whether now or after I have passed, any who shall live as their own island, their own refuge, with no other refuge; with the teaching as their island and their refuge, with no other refuge—those mendicants of mine who want to train shall be among the best of the best.”
