---
slug: sn47.1
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: In Ambapālī’s Mango Grove
---

<!-- @segment sn47.1:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn47.1:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, in Ambapālī’s Mango Grove.

<!-- @segment sn47.1:1.3 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,

<!-- @segment sn47.1:1.4 -->

“Mendicants!”

<!-- @segment sn47.1:1.5 -->

“Venerable sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment sn47.1:1.6 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment sn47.1:2.1 -->

“Mendicants, the four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to convergence. They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment.

<!-- @segment sn47.1:2.2 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment sn47.1:2.3 -->

It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.1:2.4 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.1:2.5 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of the mind—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.1:2.6 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.1:2.7 -->

The four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to convergence. They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment.”

<!-- @segment sn47.1:3.1 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment sn47.1:3.2 -->

Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said.
