---
slug: sn47.95-104
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Higher Fetters, Etc.
---

<!-- @segment sn47.95-104:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, there are five higher fetters.

<!-- @segment sn47.95-104:1.2 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment sn47.95-104:1.3 -->

Desire for rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance.

<!-- @segment sn47.95-104:1.4 -->

These are the five higher fetters.

<!-- @segment sn47.95-104:1.5 -->

The four kinds of mindfulness meditation should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters.

<!-- @segment sn47.95-104:2.1 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment sn47.95-104:2.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.95-104:2.3 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings …

<!-- @segment sn47.95-104:2.4 -->

mind …

<!-- @segment sn47.95-104:2.5 -->

principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.95-104:2.6 -->

These four kinds of mindfulness meditation should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters.”

<!-- @segment sn47.95-104:2.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn47.95-104:3.1 -->

(The Linked Discourses on Mindfulness Meditation should be told in full as in the Linked Discourses on the Path. These ten discourses correspond to SN 45.171–179, with the above as the final discourse.)

<!-- @segment sn47.95-104:3.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn47.95-104:4.1 -->

Floods, yokes, grasping,

<!-- @segment sn47.95-104:4.2 -->

ties, and underlying tendencies,

<!-- @segment sn47.95-104:4.3 -->

kinds of sensual stimulation, hindrances,

<!-- @segment sn47.95-104:4.4 -->

aggregates, and fetters high and low.

<!-- @segment sn47.95-104:4.5 -->

The Linked Discourses on Mindfulness Meditation, the third section.
