---
slug: sn47.46
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Restraint in the Monastic Code
description: The Buddha teaches the four establishments of mindfulness—body, feelings, mind, and principles—as the direct path for the purification of beings, the overcoming of sorrow and lamentation, and the realization of extinguishment.
qualities: cultivation, wholesome, mindfulness, displeasure, greed, jealousy
theme: training guideline, wisdom
---

<!-- @segment sn47.46:1.1 -->

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

<!-- @segment sn47.46:2.1 -->

“Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I’ve heard it, I’ll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute.”

<!-- @segment sn47.46:2.2 -->

“Well then, mendicant, you should purify the starting point of skillful qualities.

<!-- @segment sn47.46:2.3 -->

What is the starting point of skillful qualities?

<!-- @segment sn47.46:2.4 -->

Live restrained in the monastic code, conducting yourself well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the rules you’ve undertaken.

<!-- @segment sn47.46:2.5 -->

When you’ve done this, you should develop the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, depending on and grounded on ethics.

<!-- @segment sn47.46:3.1 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment sn47.46:3.2 -->

Meditate observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.46:3.3 -->

Meditate observing an aspect of feelings …

<!-- @segment sn47.46:3.4 -->

mind …

<!-- @segment sn47.46:3.5 -->

principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.46:3.6 -->

When you develop the four kinds of mindfulness meditation in this way, depending on and grounded on ethics, you can expect growth, not decline, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night.”

<!-- @segment sn47.46:3.7 -->

And then that mendicant approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. He rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

<!-- @segment sn47.46:4.1 -->

Then that mendicant, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment sn47.46:4.2 -->

He understood: “Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further for this place.”

<!-- @segment sn47.46:4.3 -->

And that mendicant became one of the perfected.
