---
slug: sn47.4
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: At Sālā
---

<!-- @segment sn47.4:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Kosalans near the brahmin village of Sālā.

<!-- @segment sn47.4:1.2 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment sn47.4:2.1 -->

“Mendicants, those mendicants who are junior—recently gone forth, newly come to this teaching and training—should be encouraged, supported, and established by you in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.

<!-- @segment sn47.4:2.2 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment sn47.4:2.3 -->

Please, reverends, meditate observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, at one, with minds that are clear, immersed in samādhi, and unified, so as to truly know the body.

<!-- @segment sn47.4:2.4 -->

Meditate observing an aspect of feelings—keen, aware, at one, with minds that are clear, immersed in samādhi, and unified, so as to truly know feelings.

<!-- @segment sn47.4:2.5 -->

Meditate observing an aspect of the mind—keen, aware, at one, with minds that are clear, immersed in samādhi, and unified, so as to truly know the mind.

<!-- @segment sn47.4:2.6 -->

Meditate observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, at one, with minds that are clear, immersed in samādhi, and unified, so as to truly know principles.

<!-- @segment sn47.4:3.1 -->

Those mendicants who are trainees—who haven’t achieved their heart’s desire, but live aspiring to the supreme sanctuary from the yoke—also meditate observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, at one, with minds that are clear, immersed in samādhi, and unified, so as to fully understand the body.

<!-- @segment sn47.4:3.2 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings—keen, aware, at one, with minds that are clear, immersed in samādhi, and unified, so as to fully understand feelings.

<!-- @segment sn47.4:3.3 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of the mind—keen, aware, at one, with minds that are clear, immersed in samādhi, and unified, so as to fully understand the mind.

<!-- @segment sn47.4:3.4 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, at one, with minds that are clear, immersed in samādhi, and unified, so as to fully understand principles.

<!-- @segment sn47.4:4.1 -->

Those mendicants who are perfected—who have ended the defilements, completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their heart’s goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and are rightly freed through enlightenment—also meditate observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, at one, with minds that are clear, immersed in samādhi, and unified, detached from the body.

<!-- @segment sn47.4:4.2 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings—keen, aware, at one, with minds that are clear, immersed in samādhi, and unified, detached from feelings.

<!-- @segment sn47.4:4.3 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of the mind—keen, aware, at one, with minds that are clear, immersed in samādhi, and unified, detached from the mind.

<!-- @segment sn47.4:4.4 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, at one, with minds that are clear, immersed in samādhi, and unified, detached from principles.

<!-- @segment sn47.4:5.1 -->

Those mendicants who are junior—recently gone forth, newly come to this teaching and training—should be encouraged, supported, and established by you in these four kinds of mindfulness meditation.”
