---
slug: sn47.22
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Long Lasting
description: The Buddha teaches the four establishments of mindfulness—body, feelings, mind, and principles—as the direct path for the purification of beings, the overcoming of sorrow and lamentation, and the realization of extinguishment.
qualities: quenching, mindfulness, cultivation, jhana, wholesome, displeasure
theme: training guideline, recollection of the Buddha
---

<!-- @segment sn47.22:1.1 -->

The same setting.

<!-- @segment sn47.22:1.2 -->

Venerable Bhadda said to Venerable Ānanda:

<!-- @segment sn47.22:1.3 -->

“What is the cause, Reverend Ānanda, what is the reason why the true teaching does not last long after the final quenching of the Realized One?

<!-- @segment sn47.22:1.4 -->

What is the cause, what is the reason why the true teaching does last long after the final quenching of the Realized One?”

<!-- @segment sn47.22:2.1 -->

“Good, good, Reverend Bhadda!

<!-- @segment sn47.22:2.2 -->

Your approach and eloquence are excellent, and it’s a good question.

<!-- @segment sn47.22:2.3 -->

For you asked:

<!-- @segment sn47.22:2.4 -->

‘What is the cause, Reverend Ānanda, what is the reason why the true teaching does not last long after the final quenching of the Realized One?

<!-- @segment sn47.22:2.5 -->

What is the cause, what is the reason why the true teaching does last long after the final quenching of the Realized One?’”

<!-- @segment sn47.22:2.6 -->

“Yes, reverend.”

<!-- @segment sn47.22:2.7 -->

“It’s because of not developing and cultivating the four kinds of mindfulness meditation that the true teaching doesn’t last long after the final quenching of the Realized One.

<!-- @segment sn47.22:2.8 -->

It’s because of developing and cultivating the four kinds of mindfulness meditation that the true teaching does last long after the final quenching of the Realized One.

<!-- @segment sn47.22:3.1 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment sn47.22:3.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.22:3.3 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings …

<!-- @segment sn47.22:3.4 -->

mind …

<!-- @segment sn47.22:3.5 -->

principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.22:3.6 -->

It’s because of not developing and cultivating these four kinds of mindfulness meditation that the true teaching doesn’t last long after the final quenching of the Realized One.

<!-- @segment sn47.22:3.7 -->

It’s because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of mindfulness meditation that the true teaching does last long after the final quenching of the Realized One.”
