---
slug: sn47.43
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Path
description: The Buddha teaches the four establishments of mindfulness—body, feelings, mind, and principles—as the direct path for the purification of beings, the overcoming of sorrow and lamentation, and the realization of extinguishment.
qualities: displeasure, mindfulness, sorrow, cultivation, greed, jealousy
theme: training guideline, wisdom
---

<!-- @segment sn47.43:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn47.43:1.2 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment sn47.43:1.3 -->

“Mendicants, this one time, when I was first awakened, I was staying in Uruvelā at the goatherd’s banyan tree on the bank of the Nerañjarā River.

<!-- @segment sn47.43:1.4 -->

As I was in private retreat this thought came to mind:

<!-- @segment sn47.43:1.5 -->

‘The four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to convergence. They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment.

<!-- @segment sn47.43:2.1 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment sn47.43:2.2 -->

A mendicant would meditate observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.43:2.3 -->

Or they’d meditate observing an aspect of feelings …

<!-- @segment sn47.43:2.4 -->

or mind …

<!-- @segment sn47.43:2.5 -->

or principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.43:2.6 -->

The four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to convergence. They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment.’

<!-- @segment sn47.43:3.1 -->

And then the divinity Sahampati, knowing my train of thought, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, vanished from the realm of divinity and reappeared in front of me.

<!-- @segment sn47.43:3.2 -->

He arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his cupped palms toward the Buddha, and said:

<!-- @segment sn47.43:3.3 -->

‘That’s so true, Blessed One! That’s so true, Holy One!

<!-- @segment sn47.43:3.4 -->

Sir, the four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to convergence. They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment.

<!-- @segment sn47.43:4.1 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment sn47.43:4.2 -->

A mendicant would meditate observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.43:4.3 -->

Or they’d meditate observing an aspect of feelings …

<!-- @segment sn47.43:4.4 -->

or mind …

<!-- @segment sn47.43:4.5 -->

or principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.43:4.6 -->

The four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to convergence. They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment.’

<!-- @segment sn47.43:5.1 -->

That’s what the divinity Sahampati said.

<!-- @segment sn47.43:5.2 -->

Then he went on to say:

<!-- @segment sn47.43:6.1 -->

‘The compassionate one, <j>who sees the ending of rebirth,

<!-- @segment sn47.43:6.2 -->

understands the path to convergence.

<!-- @segment sn47.43:6.3 -->

By this path people crossed over before,

<!-- @segment sn47.43:6.4 -->

will cross over, and are crossing over.’”
