---
slug: sn47.23
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Decline
---

<!-- @segment sn47.23:1.1 -->

At one time the venerables Ānanda and Bhadda were staying near Pāṭaliputta, in the Chicken Monastery.

<!-- @segment sn47.23:1.2 -->

Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Bhadda came out of retreat, went to Venerable Ānanda, and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment sn47.23:1.3 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to Ānanda:

<!-- @segment sn47.23:1.4 -->

“What’s the cause, Reverend Ānanda, what’s the reason why the true teaching declines?

<!-- @segment sn47.23:1.5 -->

And what’s the cause, what’s the reason why the true teaching doesn’t decline?”

<!-- @segment sn47.23:2.1 -->

“Good, good, Reverend Bhadda!

<!-- @segment sn47.23:2.2 -->

Your approach and eloquence are excellent, and it’s a good question.

<!-- @segment sn47.23:2.3 -->

For you asked:

<!-- @segment sn47.23:2.4 -->

‘What’s the cause, what’s the reason why the true teaching declines?

<!-- @segment sn47.23:2.5 -->

And what’s the cause, what’s the reason why the true teaching doesn’t decline?’”

<!-- @segment sn47.23:2.6 -->

“Yes, reverend.”

<!-- @segment sn47.23:2.7 -->

“It’s because of not developing and cultivating the four kinds of mindfulness meditation that the true teaching declines.

<!-- @segment sn47.23:2.8 -->

It’s because of developing and cultivating the four kinds of mindfulness meditation that the true teaching doesn’t decline.

<!-- @segment sn47.23:3.1 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment sn47.23:3.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.23:3.3 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings …

<!-- @segment sn47.23:3.4 -->

mind …

<!-- @segment sn47.23:3.5 -->

principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.23:3.6 -->

It’s because of not developing and cultivating these four kinds of mindfulness meditation that the true teaching declines.

<!-- @segment sn47.23:3.7 -->

And it’s because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of mindfulness meditation that the true teaching doesn’t decline.”
