---
slug: sn47.29
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Sirivaḍḍha
---

<!-- @segment sn47.29:1.1 -->

At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground.

<!-- @segment sn47.29:1.2 -->

Now at that time the householder Sirivaḍḍha was sick, suffering, gravely ill.

<!-- @segment sn47.29:1.3 -->

Then he addressed a man:

<!-- @segment sn47.29:1.4 -->

“Please, my man, go to Venerable Ānanda, and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Say to him:

<!-- @segment sn47.29:1.5 -->

‘Sir, the householder Sirivaḍḍha is sick, suffering, gravely ill.

<!-- @segment sn47.29:1.6 -->

He bows with his head to your feet.’

<!-- @segment sn47.29:1.7 -->

And then say:

<!-- @segment sn47.29:1.8 -->

‘Sir, please visit him at his home out of sympathy.’”

<!-- @segment sn47.29:1.9 -->

“Yes, sir,” that man replied. He did as Sirivaḍḍha asked.

<!-- @segment sn47.29:1.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn47.29:1.11 -->



<!-- @segment sn47.29:1.12 -->



<!-- @segment sn47.29:1.13 -->

Ānanda consented with silence.

<!-- @segment sn47.29:2.1 -->

Then Venerable Ānanda robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the home of the householder Sirivaḍḍha, sat down on the seat spread out, and said to him:

<!-- @segment sn47.29:2.2 -->

“I hope you’re keeping well, householder; I hope you’re all right. And I hope the pain is fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not its growing.”

<!-- @segment sn47.29:2.3 -->

“Sir, I’m not keeping well, I’m not getting by. The pain is terrible and growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its fading.”

<!-- @segment sn47.29:3.1 -->

“So you should train like this:

<!-- @segment sn47.29:3.2 -->

‘I’ll meditate observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.29:3.3 -->

I’ll meditate on an aspect of feelings …

<!-- @segment sn47.29:3.4 -->

mind …

<!-- @segment sn47.29:3.5 -->

principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.’

<!-- @segment sn47.29:3.6 -->

That’s how you should train.”

<!-- @segment sn47.29:4.1 -->

“These four kinds of mindfulness meditation that were taught by the Buddha are found in me, and I exhibit them.

<!-- @segment sn47.29:4.2 -->

For I meditate observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.29:4.3 -->

I meditate observing an aspect of feelings …

<!-- @segment sn47.29:4.4 -->

mind …

<!-- @segment sn47.29:4.5 -->

principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.29:4.6 -->

And of the five lower fetters taught by the Buddha, I don’t see any that I haven’t given up.”

<!-- @segment sn47.29:4.7 -->

“You’re fortunate, householder, so very fortunate!

<!-- @segment sn47.29:4.8 -->

You have declared the fruit of non-return.”
