---
slug: sn47.16
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Uttiya
description: The Buddha teaches the four establishments of mindfulness—body, feelings, mind, and principles—as the direct path for the purification of beings, the overcoming of sorrow and lamentation, and the realization of extinguishment.
qualities: mindfulness, displeasure, cultivation, greed, jealousy, jhana
theme: wisdom, urgency
---

<!-- @segment sn47.16:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn47.16:1.2 -->

Then Venerable Uttiya went up to the Buddha … and asked him,

<!-- @segment sn47.16:1.3 -->

“Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I’ve heard it, I’ll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute.”

<!-- @segment sn47.16:1.4 -->

“Well then, Uttiya, you should purify the starting point of skillful qualities.

<!-- @segment sn47.16:1.5 -->

What is the starting point of skillful qualities?

<!-- @segment sn47.16:1.6 -->

Well purified ethics and correct view.

<!-- @segment sn47.16:1.7 -->

When your ethics are well purified and your view is correct, you should develop the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, depending on and grounded on ethics.

<!-- @segment sn47.16:2.1 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment sn47.16:2.2 -->

Meditate observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.16:2.3 -->

Meditate observing an aspect of feelings …

<!-- @segment sn47.16:2.4 -->

mind …

<!-- @segment sn47.16:2.5 -->

principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn47.16:2.6 -->

When you develop these four kinds of mindfulness meditation, depending on and grounded on ethics, you’ll cross beyond Death’s dominion.”

<!-- @segment sn47.16:3.1 -->

And then Venerable Uttiya approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. He rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

<!-- @segment sn47.16:3.2 -->

Then Uttiya, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment sn47.16:3.3 -->

He understood: “Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further for this place.”

<!-- @segment sn47.16:3.4 -->

And Venerable Uttiya became one of the perfected.
