---
slug: sn48.40
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Irregular Order
description: The Buddha teaches on the five spiritual faculties regarding irregular order, guiding mendicants in developing faith through wisdom on the path to liberation.
qualities: equanimity, ending, suffering, happiness, displeasure, jhana
theme: training guideline, principle
---

<!-- @segment sn48.40:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, there are these five faculties.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:1.2 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment sn48.40:1.3 -->

The faculties of pain, sadness, pleasure, happiness, and equanimity.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:1.4 -->

While a mendicant is meditating—diligent, keen, and resolute—the faculty of pain arises.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:1.5 -->

They understand:

<!-- @segment sn48.40:1.6 -->

‘The faculty of pain has arisen in me. And that has a basis, a source, a condition, and a reason.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:1.7 -->

It’s not possible that the faculty of pain will arise without a basis, a source, a condition, or a reason.’

<!-- @segment sn48.40:1.8 -->

They understand the faculty of pain, its origin, its cessation, and where that faculty of pain that’s arisen ceases without remainder.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:1.9 -->

And where does that faculty of pain that’s arisen cease without remainder?

<!-- @segment sn48.40:1.10 -->

It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:1.11 -->

That’s where the faculty of pain that’s arisen ceases without remainder.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:1.12 -->

They’re called a mendicant who understands the cessation of the faculty of pain, and who applies their mind to that end.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:2.1 -->

While a mendicant is meditating—diligent, keen, and resolute—the faculty of sadness arises.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:2.2 -->

They understand:

<!-- @segment sn48.40:2.3 -->

‘The faculty of sadness has arisen in me. And that has a basis, a source, a condition, and a reason.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:2.4 -->

It’s not possible that the faculty of sadness will arise without a basis, a source, a condition, or a reason.’

<!-- @segment sn48.40:2.5 -->

They understand the faculty of sadness, its origin, its cessation, and where that faculty of sadness that’s arisen ceases without remainder.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:2.6 -->

And where does that faculty of sadness that’s arisen cease without remainder?

<!-- @segment sn48.40:2.7 -->

It’s when, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:2.8 -->

That’s where the faculty of sadness that’s arisen ceases without remainder.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:2.9 -->

They’re called a mendicant who understands the cessation of the faculty of sadness, and who applies their mind to that end.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:3.1 -->

While a mendicant is meditating—diligent, keen, and resolute—the faculty of pleasure arises.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:3.2 -->

They understand:

<!-- @segment sn48.40:3.3 -->

‘The faculty of pleasure has arisen in me. And that has a basis, a source, a condition, and a reason.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:3.4 -->

It’s not possible that the faculty of pleasure will arise without a basis, a source, a condition, or a reason.’

<!-- @segment sn48.40:3.5 -->

They understand the faculty of pleasure, its origin, its cessation, and where that faculty of pleasure that’s arisen ceases without remainder.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:3.6 -->

And where does that faculty of pleasure that’s arisen cease without remainder?

<!-- @segment sn48.40:3.7 -->

It’s when, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’

<!-- @segment sn48.40:3.8 -->

That’s where the faculty of pleasure that’s arisen ceases without remainder.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:3.9 -->

They’re called a mendicant who understands the cessation of the faculty of pleasure, and who applies their mind to that end.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:4.1 -->

While a mendicant is meditating—diligent, keen, and resolute—the faculty of happiness arises.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:4.2 -->

They understand:

<!-- @segment sn48.40:4.3 -->

‘The faculty of happiness has arisen in me. And that has a basis, a source, a condition, and a reason.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:4.4 -->

It’s not possible that the faculty of happiness will arise without a basis, a source, a condition, or a reason.’

<!-- @segment sn48.40:4.5 -->

They understand the faculty of happiness, its origin, its cessation, and where that faculty of happiness that’s arisen ceases without remainder.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:4.6 -->

And where does that faculty of happiness that’s arisen cease without remainder?

<!-- @segment sn48.40:4.7 -->

It’s when, giving up pleasure and pain, and disappearance former happiness and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:4.8 -->

That’s where the faculty of happiness that’s arisen ceases without remainder.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:4.9 -->

They’re called a mendicant who understands the cessation of the faculty of happiness, and who applies their mind to that end.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:5.1 -->

While a mendicant is meditating—diligent, keen, and resolute—the faculty of equanimity arises.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:5.2 -->

They understand:

<!-- @segment sn48.40:5.3 -->

‘The faculty of equanimity has arisen in me. And that has a basis, a source, a condition, and a reason.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:5.4 -->

It’s not possible that the faculty of equanimity will arise without a basis, a source, a condition, or a reason.’

<!-- @segment sn48.40:5.5 -->

They understand the faculty of equanimity, its origin, its cessation, and where that faculty of equanimity that’s arisen ceases without remainder.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:5.6 -->

And where does that faculty of equanimity that’s arisen cease without remainder?

<!-- @segment sn48.40:5.7 -->

It’s when a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the cessation of perception and feeling.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:5.8 -->

That’s where the faculty of equanimity that’s arisen ceases without remainder.

<!-- @segment sn48.40:5.9 -->

They’re called a mendicant who understands the cessation of the faculty of equanimity, and who applies their mind to that end.”

<!-- @segment sn48.40:5.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.40:5.11 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.40:6.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.40:6.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.40:6.3 -->
