---
slug: sn48.49
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: About Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer
description: The Buddha teaches on the five spiritual faculties regarding about bhāradvāja the alms-gatherer, guiding mendicants in developing faith through wisdom on the path to liberation.
qualities: ending, mindfulness, wisdom, collectedness
theme: principle, story
---

<!-- @segment sn48.49:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn48.49:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Kosambī, in Ghosita’s Monastery.

<!-- @segment sn48.49:1.3 -->

Now at that time Venerable Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer had declared enlightenment:

<!-- @segment sn48.49:1.4 -->

“I understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’”

<!-- @segment sn48.49:1.5 -->

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. Then they said,

<!-- @segment sn48.49:2.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.49:2.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.49:2.3 -->

“What reason does Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer see for doing this?”

<!-- @segment sn48.49:2.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.49:3.1 -->

“It’s because Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer has developed and cultivated three faculties that he declares enlightenment:

<!-- @segment sn48.49:3.2 -->

‘I understand: “Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.”’

<!-- @segment sn48.49:3.3 -->

What three?

<!-- @segment sn48.49:3.4 -->

The faculties of mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

<!-- @segment sn48.49:3.5 -->

It’s because Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer has developed and cultivated these three faculties that he declares enlightenment.

<!-- @segment sn48.49:3.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.49:3.7 -->

What’s the culmination of these three faculties?

<!-- @segment sn48.49:3.8 -->

They culminate in ending.

<!-- @segment sn48.49:3.9 -->

In the ending of what?

<!-- @segment sn48.49:3.10 -->

Of rebirth, old age, and death.

<!-- @segment sn48.49:3.11 -->

It’s because he sees that they culminate in the ending of rebirth, old age, and death that Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer declares enlightenment:

<!-- @segment sn48.49:3.12 -->

‘I understand: “Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.”’”
