---
slug: sn48.58
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Boar’s Cave
description: The Buddha teaches on the five spiritual faculties regarding the boar’s cave, guiding mendicants in developing faith through wisdom on the path to liberation.
qualities: respect, wholesome, safety, inquisitiveness, faith, mindfulness
theme: principle, story
---

<!-- @segment sn48.58:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain in the Boar’s Cave.

<!-- @segment sn48.58:1.2 -->

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Sāriputta:

<!-- @segment sn48.58:1.3 -->

“Sāriputta, considering what benefit does a mendicant with defilements ended, in rolling forth, roll forth with utmost deference for the Realized One or his instructions?”

<!-- @segment sn48.58:1.4 -->

“Sir, it is considering the supreme sanctuary from the yoke that a mendicant with defilements ended, in rolling forth, rolls forth with utmost deference for the Realized One or his instructions.”

<!-- @segment sn48.58:1.5 -->

“Good, good, Sāriputta!

<!-- @segment sn48.58:1.6 -->

For it is considering the supreme sanctuary from the yoke that a mendicant whose defilements are ended, in rolling forth, rolls forth with utmost deference for the Realized One or his instructions.

<!-- @segment sn48.58:2.1 -->

And what is that supreme sanctuary from the yoke?”

<!-- @segment sn48.58:2.2 -->

“It’s when a mendicant with defilements ended develops the faculties of faith,

<!-- @segment sn48.58:2.3 -->

energy,

<!-- @segment sn48.58:2.4 -->

mindfulness,

<!-- @segment sn48.58:2.5 -->

immersion,

<!-- @segment sn48.58:2.6 -->

and wisdom, which lead to peace and awakening.

<!-- @segment sn48.58:2.7 -->

It is considering this supreme sanctuary from the yoke that a mendicant with defilements ended, in rolling forth, rolls forth with utmost deference for the Realized One or his instructions.”

<!-- @segment sn48.58:2.8 -->

“Good, good, Sāriputta!

<!-- @segment sn48.58:2.9 -->

For this is that supreme sanctuary from the yoke.

<!-- @segment sn48.58:3.1 -->

And what is that utmost deference that a mendicant with defilements ended, in rolling forth, shows towards the Realized One or his instructions?”

<!-- @segment sn48.58:3.2 -->

“It’s when a mendicant with defilements ended maintains respect and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the training, and immersion.

<!-- @segment sn48.58:3.3 -->

This is that utmost deference.”

<!-- @segment sn48.58:3.4 -->

“Good, good, Sāriputta!

<!-- @segment sn48.58:3.5 -->

For this is that utmost deference that a mendicant with defilements ended, in rolling forth, shows towards the Realized One or his instructions.”
