---
slug: sn48.53
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: A Trainee
---

<!-- @segment sn48.53:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn48.53:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Kosambī, in Ghosita’s Monastery.

<!-- @segment sn48.53:1.3 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment sn48.53:1.4 -->

“Mendicants, is there a way that a mendicant who is a trainee, standing at the level of a trainee, can understand that they are a trainee? And that a mendicant who is an adept, standing at the level of an adept, can understand that they are an adept?”

<!-- @segment sn48.53:2.1 -->

“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. …”

<!-- @segment sn48.53:2.2 -->

“There is a way that a mendicant who is a trainee, standing at the level of a trainee, can understand that they are a trainee, and that a mendicant who is an adept, standing at the level of an adept, can understand that they are an adept.

<!-- @segment sn48.53:3.1 -->

And what is a way that a mendicant who is a trainee can understand that they are a trainee?

<!-- @segment sn48.53:3.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant who is a trainee truly understands: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’.

<!-- @segment sn48.53:3.3 -->

This is a way that a mendicant who is a trainee can understand that they are a trainee.

<!-- @segment sn48.53:4.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant who is a trainee reflects:

<!-- @segment sn48.53:4.2 -->

‘Is there any other ascetic or brahmin elsewhere whose teaching is as true, as real, as accurate as that of the Buddha?’

<!-- @segment sn48.53:4.3 -->

They understand:

<!-- @segment sn48.53:4.4 -->

‘There is no other ascetic or brahmin elsewhere whose teaching is as true, as real, as accurate as that of the Buddha.’

<!-- @segment sn48.53:4.5 -->

This too is a way that a mendicant who is a trainee can understand that they are a trainee.

<!-- @segment sn48.53:5.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant who is a trainee understands the five faculties:

<!-- @segment sn48.53:5.2 -->

faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

<!-- @segment sn48.53:5.3 -->

And although they don’t have direct meditative experience of their destination, apex, fruit, and culmination,

<!-- @segment sn48.53:5.4 -->

they do see them with penetrating wisdom.

<!-- @segment sn48.53:5.5 -->

This too is a way that a mendicant who is a trainee can understand that they are a trainee.

<!-- @segment sn48.53:6.1 -->

And what is the way that a mendicant who is an adept can understand that they are an adept?

<!-- @segment sn48.53:6.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant who is an adept understands the five faculties:

<!-- @segment sn48.53:6.3 -->

faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

<!-- @segment sn48.53:6.4 -->

They have direct meditative experience of their destination, apex, fruit, and culmination,

<!-- @segment sn48.53:6.5 -->

and they see them with penetrating wisdom.

<!-- @segment sn48.53:6.6 -->

This is a way that a mendicant who is an adept can understand that they are an adept.

<!-- @segment sn48.53:7.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant who is an adept understands the six faculties:

<!-- @segment sn48.53:7.2 -->

eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind.

<!-- @segment sn48.53:7.3 -->

They understand: ‘These six faculties will totally and utterly cease without remainder. And no other six faculties will arise anywhere anyhow.’

<!-- @segment sn48.53:7.4 -->

This too is a way that a mendicant who is an adept can understand that they are an adept.”
