---
slug: sn48.50
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: At Āpaṇa
---

<!-- @segment sn48.50:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn48.50:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Aṅgas, near the Aṅgan town named Āpaṇa.

<!-- @segment sn48.50:1.3 -->

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Sāriputta:

<!-- @segment sn48.50:1.4 -->

“Sāriputta, would a noble disciple who is sure and devoted to the Realized One have any doubt or uncertainty about the Realized One or his instructions?”

<!-- @segment sn48.50:2.1 -->

“Sir, a noble disciple who is sure and devoted to the Realized One would have no doubt or uncertainty about the Realized One or his instructions.

<!-- @segment sn48.50:2.2 -->

You can expect that a faithful noble disciple will live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They’re strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities.

<!-- @segment sn48.50:2.3 -->

For their energy is the faculty of energy.

<!-- @segment sn48.50:3.1 -->

You can expect that a faithful and energetic noble disciple will be mindful, with utmost mindfulness and alertness, able to remember and recall what was said and done long ago.

<!-- @segment sn48.50:3.2 -->

For their mindfulness is the faculty of mindfulness.

<!-- @segment sn48.50:4.1 -->

You can expect that a faithful, energetic, and mindful noble disciple will, relying on letting go, gain immersion, gain unification of mind.

<!-- @segment sn48.50:4.2 -->

For their samādhi is the faculty of immersion.

<!-- @segment sn48.50:5.1 -->

You can expect that a faithful, energetic, mindful noble disciple with their mind immersed in samādhi will understand this:

<!-- @segment sn48.50:5.2 -->

‘Transmigration has no known beginning.

<!-- @segment sn48.50:5.3 -->

No first point is found of sentient beings roaming and transmigrating, shrouded by ignorance and fettered by craving.

<!-- @segment sn48.50:5.4 -->

But when that dark mass of ignorance fades away and ceases with no residue left behind, that state is peaceful and sublime.

<!-- @segment sn48.50:5.5 -->

That is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment.’

<!-- @segment sn48.50:5.6 -->

For their noble wisdom is the faculty of wisdom.

<!-- @segment sn48.50:6.1 -->

When a noble disciple has tried again and again, recollected again and again, entered immersion again and again, and understood with wisdom again and again, they will be confident of this:

<!-- @segment sn48.50:6.2 -->

‘I have previously heard of these things.

<!-- @segment sn48.50:6.3 -->

But now I have direct meditative experience of them, and see them with penetrating wisdom.’

<!-- @segment sn48.50:6.4 -->

For their faith is the faculty of faith.”

<!-- @segment sn48.50:7.1 -->

“Good, good, Sāriputta!

<!-- @segment sn48.50:7.2 -->

Sāriputta, a noble disciple who is sure and devoted to the Realized One would have no doubt or uncertainty about the Realized One or his instructions. …”

<!-- @segment sn48.50:7.3 -->

The Buddha then repeated Sāriputta’s answer word for word.

<!-- @segment sn48.50:7.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.50:7.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.50:8.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.50:8.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.50:9.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.50:9.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.50:10.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.50:10.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.50:10.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.50:10.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.50:10.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.50:10.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.50:11.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.50:11.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.50:11.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.50:11.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.50:11.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.50:11.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.50:12.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.50:12.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.50:12.3 -->
