---
slug: sn48.57
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With the Divinity Sahampati
---

<!-- @segment sn48.57:1.1 -->

At one time, when he was first awakened, the Buddha was staying in Uruvelā at the goatherd’s banyan tree on the bank of the Nerañjarā River.

<!-- @segment sn48.57:1.2 -->

Then as he was in private retreat this thought came to his mind,

<!-- @segment sn48.57:1.3 -->

“When these five faculties are developed and cultivated they have freedom from death as their objective, destination, and culmination.

<!-- @segment sn48.57:1.4 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment sn48.57:1.5 -->

The faculties of faith,

<!-- @segment sn48.57:1.6 -->

energy,

<!-- @segment sn48.57:1.7 -->

mindfulness,

<!-- @segment sn48.57:1.8 -->

immersion,

<!-- @segment sn48.57:1.9 -->

and wisdom.

<!-- @segment sn48.57:1.10 -->

When these five faculties are developed and cultivated they have freedom from death as their objective, destination, and culmination.”

<!-- @segment sn48.57:2.1 -->

Then the divinity Sahampati knew the Buddha’s train of thought. As easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from the realm of divinity and reappeared in front of the Buddha.

<!-- @segment sn48.57:2.2 -->

He arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his cupped palms toward the Buddha, and said:

<!-- @segment sn48.57:2.3 -->

“That’s so true, Blessed One! That’s so true, Holy One!

<!-- @segment sn48.57:2.4 -->

When these five faculties are developed and cultivated they have freedom from death as their objective, destination, and culmination.

<!-- @segment sn48.57:2.5 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment sn48.57:2.6 -->

The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

<!-- @segment sn48.57:2.7 -->

When these five faculties are developed and cultivated they have freedom from death as their objective, destination, and culmination.

<!-- @segment sn48.57:3.1 -->

Once upon a time, sir, I lived the spiritual life under the fully awakened Buddha Kassapa.

<!-- @segment sn48.57:3.2 -->

There they knew me as

<!-- @segment sn48.57:3.3 -->

the mendicant Sahaka.

<!-- @segment sn48.57:3.4 -->

Because of developing and cultivating these same five faculties I lost desire for sensual pleasures. When my body broke up, after death, I was reborn in a good place, in the realm of divinity.

<!-- @segment sn48.57:3.5 -->

There they know me as

<!-- @segment sn48.57:3.6 -->

the divinity Sahampati.

<!-- @segment sn48.57:3.7 -->

That’s so true, Blessed One! That’s so true, Holy One!

<!-- @segment sn48.57:3.8 -->

I know and see how when these five faculties are developed and cultivated they have freedom from death as their objective, destination, and culmination.”
