---
slug: sn48.10
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Analysis (2nd)
---

<!-- @segment sn48.10:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, there are these five faculties.

<!-- @segment sn48.10:1.2 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment sn48.10:1.3 -->

The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

<!-- @segment sn48.10:1.4 -->

And what is the faculty of faith?

<!-- @segment sn48.10:1.5 -->

It’s when a noble disciple has faith in the Realized One’s awakening:

<!-- @segment sn48.10:1.6 -->

‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’

<!-- @segment sn48.10:1.7 -->

This is called the faculty of faith.

<!-- @segment sn48.10:2.1 -->

And what is the faculty of energy?

<!-- @segment sn48.10:2.2 -->

It’s when a noble disciple lives with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They’re strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities.

<!-- @segment sn48.10:2.3 -->

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise.

<!-- @segment sn48.10:2.4 -->

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up.

<!-- @segment sn48.10:2.5 -->

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise.

<!-- @segment sn48.10:2.6 -->

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are completed by development.

<!-- @segment sn48.10:2.7 -->

This is called the faculty of energy.

<!-- @segment sn48.10:3.1 -->

And what is the faculty of mindfulness?

<!-- @segment sn48.10:3.2 -->

It’s when a noble disciple is mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long ago.

<!-- @segment sn48.10:3.3 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn48.10:3.4 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings …

<!-- @segment sn48.10:3.5 -->

mind …

<!-- @segment sn48.10:3.6 -->

principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn48.10:3.7 -->

This is called the faculty of mindfulness.

<!-- @segment sn48.10:4.1 -->

And what is the faculty of immersion?

<!-- @segment sn48.10:4.2 -->

It’s when a noble disciple, relying on letting go, gains immersion, gains unification of mind.

<!-- @segment sn48.10:4.3 -->

Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment sn48.10:4.4 -->

As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment sn48.10:4.5 -->

And with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’

<!-- @segment sn48.10:4.6 -->

With the giving up of pleasure and pain and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

<!-- @segment sn48.10:4.7 -->

This is called the faculty of immersion.

<!-- @segment sn48.10:5.1 -->

And what is the faculty of wisdom?

<!-- @segment sn48.10:5.2 -->

It’s when a noble disciple is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering.

<!-- @segment sn48.10:5.3 -->

They truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’.

<!-- @segment sn48.10:5.4 -->

This is called the faculty of wisdom.

<!-- @segment sn48.10:5.5 -->

These are the five faculties.”

<!-- @segment sn48.10:5.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.10:5.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.10:6.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.10:6.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.10:6.3 -->
