---
slug: sn48.44
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: At the Eastern Gate
---

<!-- @segment sn48.44:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn48.44:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in Sāvatthī at the eastern gate.

<!-- @segment sn48.44:1.3 -->

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Sāriputta:

<!-- @segment sn48.44:1.4 -->

“Sāriputta, do you have faith that

<!-- @segment sn48.44:1.5 -->

the faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, when developed and cultivated, have freedom from death as their objective, destination, and culmination?”

<!-- @segment sn48.44:2.1 -->

“Sir, in this case I don’t rely on faith in the Buddha’s claim that

<!-- @segment sn48.44:2.2 -->

the faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, when developed and cultivated, have freedom from death as their objective, destination, and culmination.

<!-- @segment sn48.44:2.3 -->

There are those who have not known or seen or understood or realized or experienced this with wisdom. They may rely on faith in this matter.

<!-- @segment sn48.44:2.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.44:2.5 -->

But there are those who have known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with wisdom. They have no doubts or uncertainties in this matter.

<!-- @segment sn48.44:2.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.44:2.7 -->

I have known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with wisdom.

<!-- @segment sn48.44:2.8 -->

I have no doubts or uncertainties that the faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, when developed and cultivated, have freedom from death as their objective, destination, and culmination.”

<!-- @segment sn48.44:3.1 -->

“Good, good, Sāriputta!

<!-- @segment sn48.44:3.2 -->

There are those who have not known or seen or understood or realized or experienced this with wisdom. They may rely on faith in this matter.

<!-- @segment sn48.44:3.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn48.44:3.4 -->

But there are those who have known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with wisdom. They have no doubts or uncertainties that

<!-- @segment sn48.44:3.5 -->

the faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, when developed and cultivated, have freedom from death as their objective, destination, and culmination.”
