---
slug: sn48.9
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Analysis (1st)
---

<!-- @segment sn48.9:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, there are these five faculties.

<!-- @segment sn48.9:1.2 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment sn48.9:1.3 -->

The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

<!-- @segment sn48.9:1.4 -->

And what is the faculty of faith?

<!-- @segment sn48.9:1.5 -->

It’s when a noble disciple has faith in the Realized One’s awakening:

<!-- @segment sn48.9:1.6 -->

‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’

<!-- @segment sn48.9:1.7 -->

This is called the faculty of faith.

<!-- @segment sn48.9:2.1 -->

And what is the faculty of energy?

<!-- @segment sn48.9:2.2 -->

It’s when a noble disciple lives with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They’re strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities.

<!-- @segment sn48.9:2.3 -->

This is called the faculty of energy.

<!-- @segment sn48.9:3.1 -->

And what is the faculty of mindfulness?

<!-- @segment sn48.9:3.2 -->

It’s when a noble disciple is mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long ago.

<!-- @segment sn48.9:3.3 -->

This is called the faculty of mindfulness.

<!-- @segment sn48.9:4.1 -->

And what is the faculty of immersion?

<!-- @segment sn48.9:4.2 -->

It’s when a noble disciple, relying on letting go, gains immersion, gains unification of mind.

<!-- @segment sn48.9:4.3 -->

This is called the faculty of immersion.

<!-- @segment sn48.9:5.1 -->

And what is the faculty of wisdom?

<!-- @segment sn48.9:5.2 -->

It’s when a noble disciple is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering.

<!-- @segment sn48.9:5.3 -->

This is called the faculty of wisdom.

<!-- @segment sn48.9:5.4 -->

These are the five faculties.”
