---
slug: sn49.1-12
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Sloping East, Etc.
---

<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:1.2 -->

There the Buddha said:

<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:1.3 -->

“Mendicants, there are these four right efforts.

<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:1.4 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:1.5 -->

It’s when a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise.

<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:1.6 -->

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up.

<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:1.7 -->

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise.

<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:1.8 -->

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are completed by development.

<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:1.9 -->

These are the four right efforts.

<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:2.1 -->

The Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east.

<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:2.2 -->

In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the four right efforts slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:2.3 -->

And how does a mendicant who develops the four right efforts slant, slope, and incline to extinguishment?

<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:2.4 -->

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise.

<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:2.5 -->

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up.

<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:2.6 -->

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise.

<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:2.7 -->

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are completed by development.

<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:2.8 -->

That’s how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the four right efforts slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.”

<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:2.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:2.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:3.1 -->

(Tell in full as in <a href='https://suttacentral.net/sn45.92'>SN 45.92</a>–102.)

<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:4.1 -->

Six on slanting to the east,

<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:4.2 -->

and six on slanting to the ocean;

<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:4.3 -->

these two sixes make twelve,

<!-- @segment sn49.1-12:4.4 -->

and that’s how this chapter is recited.
