---
slug: sn51.10
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: At the Cāpāla Shrine
---

<!-- @segment sn51.10:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:1.3 -->

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Vesālī for alms.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:1.4 -->

Then, after the meal, on his return from almsround, he addressed Venerable Ānanda:

<!-- @segment sn51.10:1.5 -->

“Ānanda, get your sitting cloth.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:1.6 -->

Let’s go to the Cāpāla Shrine for the day’s meditation.”

<!-- @segment sn51.10:1.7 -->

“Yes, sir,” replied Ānanda. Taking his sitting cloth he followed behind the Buddha.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:2.1 -->

Then the Buddha went up to the Cāpāla Shrine, and sat down on the seat spread out.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:2.2 -->

Ānanda bowed to the Buddha and sat down to one side.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:2.3 -->

The Buddha said to him:

<!-- @segment sn51.10:3.1 -->

“Ānanda, Vesālī is lovely. And the Udena, Gotamaka, Seven Maidens, Many Sons, Sārandada, and Cāpāla Shrines are all lovely.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:3.2 -->

Whoever has developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic power—made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them—may, if they wish, live for the proper lifespan or what’s left of it.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:3.3 -->

The Realized One has developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic power, made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them. If he wished, the Realized One could live for the proper lifespan or what’s left of it.”

<!-- @segment sn51.10:4.1 -->

But Ānanda didn’t get it, even though the Buddha dropped such an obvious hint, such a clear sign.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:4.2 -->

He didn’t beg the Buddha,

<!-- @segment sn51.10:4.3 -->

“Sir, may the Blessed One please remain for the proper lifespan! May the Holy One please remain for the proper lifespan! That would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans.” For his mind was as if possessed by Māra.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:5.1 -->

For a second time …

<!-- @segment sn51.10:5.2 -->

and for a third time, the Buddha said to Ānanda:

<!-- @segment sn51.10:5.3 -->

“Ānanda, Vesālī is lovely. And the Udena, Gotamaka, Seven Maidens, Many Sons, Sārandada, and Cāpāla Shrines are all lovely.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:5.4 -->

Whoever has developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic power—made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them—may, if they wish, live for the proper lifespan or what’s left of it.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:5.5 -->

The Realized One has developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic power, made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them. If he wished, the Realized One could live for the proper lifespan or what’s left of it.”

<!-- @segment sn51.10:6.1 -->

But Ānanda didn’t get it, even though the Buddha dropped such an obvious hint, such a clear sign.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:6.2 -->

He didn’t beg the Buddha,

<!-- @segment sn51.10:6.3 -->

“Sir, may the Blessed One please remain for the proper lifespan! May the Holy One please remain for the proper lifespan! That would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans.” For his mind was as if possessed by Māra.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:7.1 -->

Then the Buddha said to him,

<!-- @segment sn51.10:7.2 -->

“Go now, Ānanda,

<!-- @segment sn51.10:7.3 -->

at your convenience.”

<!-- @segment sn51.10:7.4 -->

“Yes, sir,” replied Ānanda. He rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before sitting at the root of a tree close by.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:8.1 -->

And then, not long after Ānanda had left, Māra the Wicked went up to the Buddha and said to him:

<!-- @segment sn51.10:9.1 -->

“Sir, may the Blessed One now be fully extinguished! May the Holy One now be fully extinguished! Now is the time for the full extinguishment of the Buddha.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:9.2 -->

Sir, you once made this statement:

<!-- @segment sn51.10:9.3 -->

‘Wicked One, I shall not be fully extinguished until I have monk disciples who are competent, educated, self-assured, learned, have memorized the teachings, and practice in line with the teaching. Not until they practice properly, living in line with the teaching. Not until they’ve learned their own tradition, and explain, teach, assert, establish, disclose, analyze, and make it clear. Not until they can legitimately and completely refute the doctrines of others that come up, and teach with a demonstrable basis.’

<!-- @segment sn51.10:10.1 -->

Today you do have such monk disciples.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:10.2 -->

May the Blessed One now be fully extinguished! May the Holy One now be fully extinguished! Now is the time for the full extinguishment of the Buddha.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:11.1 -->

Sir, you once made this statement:

<!-- @segment sn51.10:11.2 -->

‘Wicked One, I shall not be fully extinguished until I have nun disciples who are competent, educated, self-assured, learned …’ …

<!-- @segment sn51.10:12.1 -->

Today you do have such nun disciples.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:12.2 -->

May the Blessed One now be fully extinguished! May the Holy One now be fully extinguished! Now is the time for the full extinguishment of the Buddha.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:13.1 -->

Sir, you once made this statement:

<!-- @segment sn51.10:13.2 -->

‘Wicked One, I shall not be fully extinguished until I have layman disciples …

<!-- @segment sn51.10:13.3 -->

and laywoman disciples who are competent, educated, self-assured, learned …’ …

<!-- @segment sn51.10:14.1 -->

Today you do have such layman

<!-- @segment sn51.10:14.2 -->

and laywoman disciples.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:14.3 -->

May the Blessed One now be fully extinguished! May the Holy One now be fully extinguished! Now is the time for the full extinguishment of the Buddha.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:15.1 -->

Sir, you once made this statement:

<!-- @segment sn51.10:15.2 -->

‘Wicked One, I shall not be fully extinguished until my spiritual path is successful and prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and well proclaimed wherever there are gods and humans.’

<!-- @segment sn51.10:15.3 -->

Today your spiritual path is successful and prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and well proclaimed wherever there are gods and humans.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:15.4 -->

May the Blessed One now be fully extinguished! May the Holy One now be fully extinguished! Now is the time for the full extinguishment of the Buddha.”

<!-- @segment sn51.10:16.1 -->

When this was said, the Buddha said to Māra,

<!-- @segment sn51.10:16.2 -->

“Relax, Wicked One. The full extinguishment of the Realized One will be soon.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:16.3 -->

Three months from now the Realized One will be fully extinguished.”

<!-- @segment sn51.10:17.1 -->

So at the Cāpāla Shrine the Buddha, mindful and aware, surrendered the life force.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:17.2 -->

When he did so there was a great earthquake, awe-inspiring and hair-raising, and thunder cracked the sky.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:17.3 -->

Then, understanding this matter, on that occasion the Buddha expressed this heartfelt sentiment:

<!-- @segment sn51.10:18.1 -->

“Comparing the incomparable <j>with the creation of prolonged life,

<!-- @segment sn51.10:18.2 -->

the sage surrendered the life force.

<!-- @segment sn51.10:18.3 -->

Happy inside, serene,

<!-- @segment sn51.10:18.4 -->

he shattered self-creation like a suit of armor.”

<!-- @segment sn51.10:18.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.10:18.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.10:19.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.10:19.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.10:19.3 -->
