---
slug: sn51.31
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: About Moggallāna
---

<!-- @segment sn51.31:1.1 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment sn51.31:1.2 -->

“What do you think, mendicants?

<!-- @segment sn51.31:1.3 -->

What things has the mendicant Moggallāna developed and cultivated so as to have such power and might?”

<!-- @segment sn51.31:2.1 -->

“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge. …”

<!-- @segment sn51.31:2.2 -->

“The mendicant Moggallāna has become so powerful and mighty by developing and cultivating the four bases of psychic power.

<!-- @segment sn51.31:3.1 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment sn51.31:3.2 -->

Moggallāna develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort.

<!-- @segment sn51.31:3.3 -->

He thinks: ‘My enthusiasm won’t be too lax or too tense. And it’ll be neither constricted internally nor scattered externally.’

<!-- @segment sn51.31:3.4 -->

And he meditates perceiving before and behind:

<!-- @segment sn51.31:3.5 -->

as before, so behind; as behind, so before;

<!-- @segment sn51.31:3.6 -->

as below, so above; as above, so below;

<!-- @segment sn51.31:3.7 -->

as by day, so by night; as by night, so by day.

<!-- @segment sn51.31:3.8 -->

And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, he develops a mind that’s full of radiance.

<!-- @segment sn51.31:3.9 -->

He develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy …

<!-- @segment sn51.31:3.10 -->

mental development …

<!-- @segment sn51.31:3.11 -->

inquiry, and active effort.

<!-- @segment sn51.31:3.12 -->

He thinks: ‘My inquiry won’t be too lax or too tense. And it’ll be neither constricted internally nor scattered externally.’ …

<!-- @segment sn51.31:3.13 -->

And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, he develops a mind that’s full of radiance.

<!-- @segment sn51.31:3.14 -->

The mendicant Moggallāna has become so powerful and mighty by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power.

<!-- @segment sn51.31:4.1 -->

And by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, the mendicant Moggallāna wields the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying himself and becoming one again … controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity.

<!-- @segment sn51.31:4.2 -->

And by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, the mendicant Moggallāna realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And he lives having realized it with his own insight due to the ending of defilements.”
