---
slug: sn51.20
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Analysis
---

<!-- @segment sn51.20:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, when the four bases of psychic power are developed and cultivated they’re very fruitful and beneficial.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:2.1 -->

How so?

<!-- @segment sn51.20:2.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:2.3 -->

They think: ‘My enthusiasm won’t be too lax or too tense. And it’ll be neither constricted internally nor scattered externally.’

<!-- @segment sn51.20:2.4 -->

And they meditate perceiving before and behind:

<!-- @segment sn51.20:2.5 -->

as before, so behind; as behind, so before;

<!-- @segment sn51.20:2.6 -->

as below, so above; as above, so below;

<!-- @segment sn51.20:2.7 -->

as by day, so by night; as by night, so by day.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:2.8 -->

And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, they develop a mind that’s full of radiance.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:2.9 -->

They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy …

<!-- @segment sn51.20:2.10 -->

mental development …

<!-- @segment sn51.20:2.11 -->

inquiry, and active effort.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:2.12 -->

They think: ‘My inquiry won’t be too lax or too tense. And it’ll be neither constricted internally nor scattered externally.’

<!-- @segment sn51.20:2.13 -->

And they meditate perceiving before and behind:

<!-- @segment sn51.20:2.14 -->

as before, so behind; as behind, so before;

<!-- @segment sn51.20:2.15 -->

as below, so above; as above, so below;

<!-- @segment sn51.20:2.16 -->

as by day, so by night; as by night, so by day.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:2.17 -->

And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, they develop a mind that’s full of radiance.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:3.1 -->

And what is enthusiasm that’s too lax?

<!-- @segment sn51.20:3.2 -->

It’s when enthusiasm is coupled with laziness.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:3.3 -->

This is called lax enthusiasm.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:4.1 -->

And what is enthusiasm that’s too tense?

<!-- @segment sn51.20:4.2 -->

It’s when enthusiasm is coupled with restlessness.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:4.3 -->

This is called tense enthusiasm.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:5.1 -->

And what is enthusiasm that’s constricted internally?

<!-- @segment sn51.20:5.2 -->

It’s when enthusiasm is coupled with dullness and drowsiness.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:5.3 -->

This is called enthusiasm constricted internally.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:6.1 -->

And what is enthusiasm that’s scattered externally?

<!-- @segment sn51.20:6.2 -->

It’s when enthusiasm is frequently scattered and diffused externally on account of the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:6.3 -->

This is called enthusiasm scattered externally.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:7.1 -->

And how does a mendicant meditate perceiving before and behind:

<!-- @segment sn51.20:7.2 -->

as before, so behind; as behind, so before?

<!-- @segment sn51.20:7.3 -->

It’s when the perception of before and behind is properly grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and penetrated with wisdom by a mendicant.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:7.4 -->

That’s how a mendicant meditates perceiving before and behind:

<!-- @segment sn51.20:7.5 -->

as before, so behind; as behind, so before.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:8.1 -->

And how does a mendicant meditate as below, so above; as above, so below?

<!-- @segment sn51.20:8.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant examines their own body up from the soles of the feet and down from the tips of the hairs, wrapped in skin and full of many kinds of filth.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:8.3 -->

‘In this body there is head hair, body hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, undigested food, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva, snot, synovial fluid, urine.’

<!-- @segment sn51.20:8.4 -->

That’s how a mendicant meditates as below, so above; as above, so below.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:9.1 -->

And how does a mendicant meditate as by day, so by night; as by night, so by day?

<!-- @segment sn51.20:9.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort, with the same features, attributes, and signs by day as by night.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:9.3 -->

And they develop it with the same features, attributes, and signs by night as by day.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:9.4 -->

That’s how a mendicant meditates as by day, so by night; as by night, so by day.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:10.1 -->

And how, with an open and unenveloped heart, does a mendicant develop a mind that’s full of radiance?

<!-- @segment sn51.20:10.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant has properly grasped the perception of light, and has properly grasped the perception of day.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:10.3 -->

That’s how, with an open and unenveloped heart, a mendicant develops a mind that’s full of radiance.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:11.1 -->

And what is energy that’s too lax? …

<!-- @segment sn51.20:11.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:11.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:12.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:12.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:12.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:13.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:13.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:13.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:14.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:14.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:15.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:15.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:15.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:16.1 -->

And what is mental development that’s too lax? …

<!-- @segment sn51.20:16.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:16.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:17.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:17.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:17.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:18.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:18.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:18.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:19.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:19.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:19.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:19.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:20.1 -->

And what is inquiry that’s too lax?

<!-- @segment sn51.20:20.2 -->

It’s when inquiry is coupled with laziness.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:20.3 -->

This is called lax inquiry.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:21.1 -->

And what is inquiry that’s too tense?

<!-- @segment sn51.20:21.2 -->

It’s when inquiry is coupled with restlessness.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:21.3 -->

This is called tense inquiry.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:22.1 -->

And what is inquiry that’s constricted internally?

<!-- @segment sn51.20:22.2 -->

It’s when inquiry is coupled with dullness and drowsiness.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:22.3 -->

This is called inquiry constricted internally.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:23.1 -->

And what is inquiry that’s scattered externally?

<!-- @segment sn51.20:23.2 -->

It’s when inquiry is frequently scattered and diffused externally on account of the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:23.3 -->

This is called inquiry scattered externally. …

<!-- @segment sn51.20:23.4 -->

That’s how, with an open and unenveloped heart, a mendicant develops a mind that’s full of radiance.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:23.5 -->

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated in this way they’re very fruitful and beneficial.

<!-- @segment sn51.20:24.1 -->

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated in this way, a mendicant wields the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and becoming one again … controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity. …

<!-- @segment sn51.20:24.2 -->

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated in this way, they realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.”

<!-- @segment sn51.20:24.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:24.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:25.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:25.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.20:25.3 -->
