---
slug: sn51.15
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Brahmin Uṇṇābha
---

<!-- @segment sn51.15:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn51.15:1.2 -->

At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Kosambī, in Ghosita’s Monastery.

<!-- @segment sn51.15:1.3 -->

Then Uṇṇābha the brahmin went up to Venerable Ānanda, and exchanged greetings with him.

<!-- @segment sn51.15:1.4 -->

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to him,

<!-- @segment sn51.15:1.5 -->

“Worthy Ānanda, what’s the goal of leading the spiritual life under the ascetic Gotama?”

<!-- @segment sn51.15:1.6 -->

“The goal of leading the spiritual life under the Buddha, brahmin, is to give up desire.”

<!-- @segment sn51.15:2.1 -->

“But is there a path and a practice for giving up that desire?”

<!-- @segment sn51.15:2.2 -->

“There is.”

<!-- @segment sn51.15:3.1 -->

“What is that path?”

<!-- @segment sn51.15:3.2 -->

“It’s when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm …

<!-- @segment sn51.15:3.3 -->

energy …

<!-- @segment sn51.15:3.4 -->

mental development …

<!-- @segment sn51.15:3.5 -->

inquiry, and active effort.

<!-- @segment sn51.15:3.6 -->

This is the path and the practice for giving up that desire.”

<!-- @segment sn51.15:4.1 -->

“This being the case, worthy Ānanda, the path is endless, not finite.

<!-- @segment sn51.15:4.2 -->

For it’s not possible to give up desire by means of desire.”

<!-- @segment sn51.15:4.3 -->

“Well then, brahmin, I’ll ask you about this in return, and you can answer as you like.

<!-- @segment sn51.15:4.4 -->

What do you think, brahmin?

<!-- @segment sn51.15:4.5 -->

Have you ever had a desire to walk to the park,

<!-- @segment sn51.15:4.6 -->

but when you arrived at the park, the corresponding desire faded away?”

<!-- @segment sn51.15:4.7 -->

“Yes, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn51.15:4.8 -->

“Have you ever had the energy to walk to the park,

<!-- @segment sn51.15:4.9 -->

but when you arrived at the park, the corresponding energy faded away?”

<!-- @segment sn51.15:4.10 -->

“Yes, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn51.15:4.11 -->

“Have you ever had the idea to walk to the park,

<!-- @segment sn51.15:4.12 -->

but when you arrived at the park, the corresponding idea faded away?”

<!-- @segment sn51.15:4.13 -->

“Yes, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn51.15:4.14 -->

“Have you ever inquired regarding a walk to the park,

<!-- @segment sn51.15:4.15 -->

but when you arrived at the park, the corresponding inquiry faded away?”

<!-- @segment sn51.15:4.16 -->

“Yes, sir.”

<!-- @segment sn51.15:5.1 -->

“In the same way, take a mendicant who is perfected—with defilements ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their heart’s goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment. They formerly had the desire to attain perfection, but when they attained perfection the corresponding desire faded away.

<!-- @segment sn51.15:5.2 -->

They formerly had the energy to attain perfection, but when they attained perfection the corresponding energy faded away.

<!-- @segment sn51.15:5.3 -->

They formerly had the idea to attain perfection, but when they attained perfection the corresponding idea faded away.

<!-- @segment sn51.15:5.4 -->

They formerly inquired regarding attaining perfection, but when they attained perfection the corresponding inquiry faded away.

<!-- @segment sn51.15:5.5 -->

What do you think, brahmin?

<!-- @segment sn51.15:5.6 -->

This being the case, is the path endless or finite?”

<!-- @segment sn51.15:6.1 -->

“Clearly, worthy Ānanda, this being the case, the path is finite, not endless.

<!-- @segment sn51.15:6.2 -->

Excellent, worthy Ānanda! Excellent!

<!-- @segment sn51.15:6.3 -->

As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, the worthy Ānanda has made the teaching clear in many ways.

<!-- @segment sn51.15:6.4 -->

I go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment sn51.15:6.5 -->

From this day forth, may the worthy Ānanda remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”
