---
slug: sn51.14
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Moggallāna
---

<!-- @segment sn51.14:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn51.14:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother in the Eastern Monastery.

<!-- @segment sn51.14:1.3 -->

Now at that time several mendicants were staying beneath the longhouse. They were restless, insolent, fickle, scurrilous, loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking situational awareness and immersion, with straying minds and undisciplined faculties.

<!-- @segment sn51.14:2.1 -->

Then the Buddha addressed Venerable Mahāmoggallāna,

<!-- @segment sn51.14:2.2 -->

“These spiritual companions of yours staying beneath the longhouse are restless, insolent, fickle, scurrilous, loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking situational awareness and immersion, with straying minds and undisciplined faculties.

<!-- @segment sn51.14:2.3 -->

Go, Moggallāna, and strike awe in those mendicants!”

<!-- @segment sn51.14:3.1 -->

“Yes, sir,” replied Mahāmoggallāna. Then he used his psychic power to make the longhouse shake and rock and tremble with his big toe.

<!-- @segment sn51.14:3.2 -->

Then those mendicants stood to one side, shocked and awestruck.

<!-- @segment sn51.14:3.3 -->

“Oh lord, how incredible, how amazing!

<!-- @segment sn51.14:3.4 -->

There’s no wind at all; and this stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother has deep foundations. It’s firmly embedded, imperturbable and unshakable. And yet it shakes and rocks and trembles!”

<!-- @segment sn51.14:4.1 -->

Then the Buddha went up to those mendicants and said:

<!-- @segment sn51.14:4.2 -->

“Why do you, mendicants, stand to one side, shocked and awestruck?”

<!-- @segment sn51.14:4.3 -->

“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing!

<!-- @segment sn51.14:4.4 -->

There’s no wind at all; and this stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother has deep foundations. It’s firmly embedded, imperturbable and unshakable. And yet it shakes and rocks and trembles!”

<!-- @segment sn51.14:4.5 -->

“Wanting to strike awe in you, the mendicant Moggallāna made the longhouse shake and rock and tremble with his big toe.

<!-- @segment sn51.14:4.6 -->

What do you think, mendicants?

<!-- @segment sn51.14:4.7 -->

What things has the mendicant Moggallāna developed and cultivated so as to have such power and might?”

<!-- @segment sn51.14:4.8 -->

“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge. Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The mendicants will listen and remember it.”

<!-- @segment sn51.14:5.1 -->

“Well then, mendicants, listen.

<!-- @segment sn51.14:5.2 -->

The mendicant Moggallāna has become so powerful and mighty by developing and cultivating the four bases of psychic power.

<!-- @segment sn51.14:5.3 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment sn51.14:5.4 -->

Moggallāna develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm …

<!-- @segment sn51.14:5.5 -->

energy …

<!-- @segment sn51.14:5.6 -->

mental development …

<!-- @segment sn51.14:5.7 -->

inquiry, and active effort.

<!-- @segment sn51.14:5.8 -->

He thinks: ‘My inquiry won’t be too lax or too tense. And it’ll be neither constricted internally nor scattered externally.’

<!-- @segment sn51.14:5.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn51.14:5.10 -->

And he meditates perceiving before and behind:

<!-- @segment sn51.14:5.11 -->

as before, so behind; as behind, so before;

<!-- @segment sn51.14:5.12 -->

as below, so above; as above, so below;

<!-- @segment sn51.14:5.13 -->

as by day, so by night; as by night, so by day.

<!-- @segment sn51.14:5.14 -->

And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, he develops a mind that’s full of radiance.

<!-- @segment sn51.14:5.15 -->

The mendicant Moggallāna has become so powerful and mighty by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power.

<!-- @segment sn51.14:5.16 -->

And by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, the mendicant Moggallāna wields the many kinds of psychic power … controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity. …

<!-- @segment sn51.14:5.17 -->

And by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, the mendicant Moggallāna realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And he lives having realized it with his own insight due to the ending of defilements.”
