---
slug: sn52.8
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Salaḷa Tree Hut
description: Venerable Anuruddha teaches that the four kinds of mindfulness meditation—regarding body, feelings, mind, and principles—are the noble path to the complete ending of suffering when undertaken with keen awareness.
qualities: mindfulness, cultivation, jhana, merit, displeasure, greed
theme: training guideline, inspiration
---

<!-- @segment sn52.8:1.1 -->

At one time Venerable Anuruddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the <i lang='pi' translate='no'>salaḷa</i> tree hut.

<!-- @segment sn52.8:1.2 -->

There Venerable Anuruddha addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment sn52.8:1.3 -->

“Reverends, suppose that, although the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east,

<!-- @segment sn52.8:1.4 -->

a large crowd were to come along with a spade and basket, saying:

<!-- @segment sn52.8:1.5 -->

‘We’ll make this Ganges river slant, slope, and incline to the west!’

<!-- @segment sn52.8:1.6 -->

What do you think, reverends? Would they succeed?”

<!-- @segment sn52.8:1.7 -->

“No, reverend.

<!-- @segment sn52.8:1.8 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment sn52.8:1.9 -->

The Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east.

<!-- @segment sn52.8:1.10 -->

It’s not easy to make it slant, slope, and incline to the west.

<!-- @segment sn52.8:1.11 -->

That large crowd will eventually get weary and frustrated.”

<!-- @segment sn52.8:2.1 -->

“In the same way, while a mendicant develops and cultivates the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, if rulers or their chief ministers, friends or colleagues, relatives or family should invite them to accept wealth, saying:

<!-- @segment sn52.8:2.2 -->

‘Please, my man, why let these ocher robes torment you?

<!-- @segment sn52.8:2.3 -->

Why follow the practice of shaving your head and carrying an alms bowl?

<!-- @segment sn52.8:2.4 -->

Come, return to a lesser life, enjoy wealth, and make merit!’

<!-- @segment sn52.8:3.1 -->

It is quite impossible for a mendicant who is developing and cultivating the four kinds of mindfulness meditation to resign the training and return to a lesser life.

<!-- @segment sn52.8:3.2 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment sn52.8:3.3 -->

Because for a long time that mendicant’s mind has slanted, sloped, and inclined to seclusion. So it’s impossible for them to return to a lesser life.

<!-- @segment sn52.8:3.4 -->

And how does a mendicant develop and cultivate the four kinds of mindfulness meditation?

<!-- @segment sn52.8:3.5 -->

It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body …

<!-- @segment sn52.8:3.6 -->

feelings …

<!-- @segment sn52.8:3.7 -->

mind …

<!-- @segment sn52.8:3.8 -->

principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn52.8:3.9 -->

That’s how a mendicant develops and cultivates the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.”
