---
slug: sn52.1
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: In Private (1st)
---

<!-- @segment sn52.1:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn52.1:1.2 -->

At one time Venerable Anuruddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

<!-- @segment sn52.1:1.3 -->

Then as Anuruddha was in private retreat this thought came to his mind:

<!-- @segment sn52.1:1.4 -->

“Whoever has missed out on these four kinds of mindfulness meditation has missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.

<!-- @segment sn52.1:1.5 -->

Whoever has undertaken these four kinds of mindfulness meditation has undertaken the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.”

<!-- @segment sn52.1:2.1 -->

Then Venerable Mahāmoggallāna knew what Venerable Anuruddha was thinking. As easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, he reappeared in front of Anuruddha,

<!-- @segment sn52.1:2.2 -->

and said to him:

<!-- @segment sn52.1:2.3 -->

“Reverend Anuruddha, how do you define the undertaking of the four kinds of mindfulness meditation by a mendicant?”

<!-- @segment sn52.1:3.1 -->

“Reverend, it’s when a mendicant, with respect to the body internally, meditates observing the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn52.1:3.2 -->

With respect to the body externally, they meditate observing the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn52.1:3.3 -->

With respect to the body internally and externally, they meditate observing the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment sn52.1:4.1 -->

If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do.

<!-- @segment sn52.1:4.2 -->

If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive,’ that’s what they do.

<!-- @segment sn52.1:4.3 -->

If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive and the repulsive,’ that’s what they do.

<!-- @segment sn52.1:4.4 -->

If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive and the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do.

<!-- @segment sn52.1:4.5 -->

If they wish: ‘May I meditate staying equanimous, mindful and aware, shunning both the repulsive and the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do.

<!-- @segment sn52.1:5.1 -->

With respect to feelings internally …

<!-- @segment sn52.1:5.2 -->

externally …

<!-- @segment sn52.1:5.3 -->

internally and externally, they meditate observing the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish …

<!-- @segment sn52.1:6.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn52.1:6.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn52.1:6.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn52.1:6.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn52.1:6.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn52.1:7.1 -->

With respect to the mind internally …

<!-- @segment sn52.1:7.2 -->

externally …

<!-- @segment sn52.1:7.3 -->

internally and externally, they meditate observing the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish …

<!-- @segment sn52.1:8.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn52.1:8.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn52.1:9.1 -->

With respect to principles internally …

<!-- @segment sn52.1:9.2 -->

externally …

<!-- @segment sn52.1:9.3 -->

internally and externally, they meditate observing the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish …

<!-- @segment sn52.1:10.1 -->

If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do. …

<!-- @segment sn52.1:10.2 -->

If they wish: ‘May I meditate staying equanimous, mindful and aware, ignoring both the repulsive and the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do.

<!-- @segment sn52.1:10.3 -->

That’s how to define the undertaking of the four kinds of mindfulness meditation by a mendicant.”
