---
slug: sn53.1-12
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Absorptions, Etc.
---

<!-- @segment sn53.1-12:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn53.1-12:1.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn53.1-12:1.3 -->

“Mendicants, there are these four absorptions.

<!-- @segment sn53.1-12:1.4 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment sn53.1-12:1.5 -->

It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment sn53.1-12:1.6 -->

As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment sn53.1-12:1.7 -->

And with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’

<!-- @segment sn53.1-12:1.8 -->

With the giving up of pleasure and pain and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

<!-- @segment sn53.1-12:1.9 -->

These are the four absorptions.

<!-- @segment sn53.1-12:2.1 -->

The Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east.

<!-- @segment sn53.1-12:2.2 -->

In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the four absorptions slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

<!-- @segment sn53.1-12:2.3 -->

And how does a mendicant who develops and cultivates the four absorptions slant, slope, and incline to extinguishment?

<!-- @segment sn53.1-12:2.4 -->

It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment sn53.1-12:2.5 -->

As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption …

<!-- @segment sn53.1-12:2.6 -->

third absorption …

<!-- @segment sn53.1-12:2.7 -->

fourth absorption.

<!-- @segment sn53.1-12:2.8 -->

That’s how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the four absorptions slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.”

<!-- @segment sn53.1-12:2.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn53.1-12:2.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn53.1-12:3.1 -->

Six on slanting to the east,

<!-- @segment sn53.1-12:3.2 -->

and six on slanting to the ocean;

<!-- @segment sn53.1-12:3.3 -->

these two sixes make twelve,

<!-- @segment sn53.1-12:3.4 -->

and that’s how this chapter is recited.
