---
slug: sn54.7
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: About Mahākappina
description: The Buddha teaches how mindfulness of breathing is developed through sixteen steps—from knowing long and short breaths through experiencing the whole body, stilling bodily and mental processes, gladdening and liberating the mind, to contemplating impermanence, fading away, cessation, and letting go—regarding about mahākappina.
qualities: mindfulness, perturbation, giving up, collectedness
theme: training guideline
---

<!-- @segment sn54.7:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn54.7:1.2 -->

Now at that time Venerable Mahākappina was sitting not far from the Buddha, cross-legged, his body set straight, and mindfulness brought to the present.

<!-- @segment sn54.7:1.3 -->

The Buddha saw him,

<!-- @segment sn54.7:1.4 -->

and addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment sn54.7:2.1 -->

“Mendicants, do you see any disturbance or trembling in that mendicant’s body?”

<!-- @segment sn54.7:2.2 -->

“Sir, whenever we see that mendicant meditating—whether in the middle of the Saṅgha or alone in private—we never see any disturbance or trembling in his body.”

<!-- @segment sn54.7:3.1 -->

“Mendicants, when an immersion has been developed and cultivated there’s no disturbance or trembling of the body or mind. That mendicant gets such immersion when he wants, without trouble or difficulty.

<!-- @segment sn54.7:3.2 -->

And what is that immersion?

<!-- @segment sn54.7:4.1 -->

When immersion due to mindfulness of breathing has been developed and cultivated there’s no disturbance or trembling of the body or mind.

<!-- @segment sn54.7:4.2 -->

And how is immersion due to mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated in such a way?

<!-- @segment sn54.7:5.1 -->

It’s when a mendicant—gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut—sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight, and brings mindfulness to the present.

<!-- @segment sn54.7:5.2 -->

Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. …

<!-- @segment sn54.7:5.3 -->

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing letting go.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing letting go.’

<!-- @segment sn54.7:5.4 -->

That’s how immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated so that there’s no disturbance or trembling of the body or mind.”
