---
slug: sn54.6
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Ariṭṭha
---

<!-- @segment sn54.6:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn54.6:1.2 -->

There the Buddha … said:

<!-- @segment sn54.6:1.3 -->

“Mendicants, do you develop mindfulness of breathing?”

<!-- @segment sn54.6:1.4 -->

When he said this, Venerable Ariṭṭha said to him:

<!-- @segment sn54.6:1.5 -->

“Sir, I develop mindfulness of breathing.”

<!-- @segment sn54.6:1.6 -->

“But mendicant, how do you develop it?”

<!-- @segment sn54.6:1.7 -->

“Sir, I’ve given up desire for sensual pleasures of the past. I’m rid of desire for sensual pleasures of the future. And I have eliminated perception of aversion regarding phenomena internally and externally.

<!-- @segment sn54.6:1.8 -->

Just mindful, I will breathe in. Mindful, I will breathe out.

<!-- @segment sn54.6:1.9 -->

That’s how I develop mindfulness of breathing.”

<!-- @segment sn54.6:2.1 -->

“That is mindfulness of breathing, Ariṭṭha; I don’t deny it.

<!-- @segment sn54.6:2.2 -->

But as to how mindfulness of breathing is fulfilled in detail,

<!-- @segment sn54.6:2.3 -->

listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment sn54.6:2.4 -->

“Yes, sir,” Ariṭṭha replied.

<!-- @segment sn54.6:2.5 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment sn54.6:3.1 -->

“And how is mindfulness of breathing fulfilled in detail?

<!-- @segment sn54.6:3.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant—gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut—sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight, and brings mindfulness to the present.

<!-- @segment sn54.6:3.3 -->

Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out.

<!-- @segment sn54.6:3.4 -->

Breathing in heavily they know: ‘I’m breathing in heavily.’ Breathing out heavily they know: ‘I’m breathing out heavily.’ …

<!-- @segment sn54.6:3.5 -->

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing letting go.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing letting go.’

<!-- @segment sn54.6:3.6 -->

This is how mindfulness of breathing is fulfilled in detail.”
