---
slug: sn54.12
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: In Doubt
---

<!-- @segment sn54.12:1.1 -->

At one time Venerable Lomasakaṅgiya was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery.

<!-- @segment sn54.12:1.2 -->

Then Mahānāma the Sakyan went up to Venerable Lomasakaṅgiya, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment sn54.12:1.3 -->

“Sir, is the meditation of a trainee just the same as the meditation of a realized one? Or is the meditation of a trainee different from the meditation of a realized one?”

<!-- @segment sn54.12:2.1 -->

“Reverend Mahānāma, the meditation of a trainee and a realized one are not the same;

<!-- @segment sn54.12:2.2 -->

they are different.

<!-- @segment sn54.12:2.3 -->

Those mendicants who are trainees haven’t achieved their heart’s desire, but live aspiring for the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. They meditate after giving up the five hindrances.

<!-- @segment sn54.12:2.4 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment sn54.12:2.5 -->

The hindrances of sensual desire, ill will,

<!-- @segment sn54.12:2.6 -->

dullness and drowsiness,

<!-- @segment sn54.12:2.7 -->

restlessness and remorse,

<!-- @segment sn54.12:2.8 -->

and doubt.

<!-- @segment sn54.12:3.1 -->

Those who are trainee mendicants … meditate after giving up the five hindrances.

<!-- @segment sn54.12:4.1 -->

Those mendicants who are perfected—who have ended the defilements, completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their heart’s goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and are rightly freed through enlightenment—for them, the five hindrances are cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future.

<!-- @segment sn54.12:4.2 -->

What five?

<!-- @segment sn54.12:4.3 -->

The hindrances of sensual desire,

<!-- @segment sn54.12:4.4 -->

ill will,

<!-- @segment sn54.12:4.5 -->

dullness and drowsiness,

<!-- @segment sn54.12:4.6 -->

restlessness and remorse,

<!-- @segment sn54.12:4.7 -->

and doubt.

<!-- @segment sn54.12:5.1 -->

Those mendicants who are perfected—who have ended the defilements … for them, the five hindrances are cut off at the root … and unable to arise in the future.

<!-- @segment sn54.12:5.2 -->

And here’s another way to understand how

<!-- @segment sn54.12:5.3 -->

the meditation of a trainee and a realized one are different.

<!-- @segment sn54.12:6.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in a forest near Icchānaṅgala.

<!-- @segment sn54.12:6.2 -->

There he addressed the mendicants,

<!-- @segment sn54.12:6.3 -->

‘Mendicants, I wish to go on retreat for three months.

<!-- @segment sn54.12:6.4 -->

No-one should approach me, except for the one who brings my almsfood.’

<!-- @segment sn54.12:6.5 -->

‘Yes, sir,’ replied those mendicants. And no-one approached him, except for the one who brought the almsfood.

<!-- @segment sn54.12:7.1 -->

Then after three months had passed, the Buddha came out of retreat and addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment sn54.12:7.2 -->

‘Mendicants, if wanderers who follow another religion were to ask you:

<!-- @segment sn54.12:7.3 -->

“Reverends, what was the ascetic Gotama’s usual meditation during the rainy season residence?” You should answer them like this:

<!-- @segment sn54.12:7.4 -->

“Reverends, the ascetic Gotama’s usual meditation during the rainy season residence was immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.”

<!-- @segment sn54.12:7.5 -->

In this regard: mindful, I breathe in. Mindful, I breathe out.

<!-- @segment sn54.12:7.6 -->

Breathing in heavily I know: “I’m breathing in heavily.” Breathing out heavily I know: “I’m breathing out heavily.” …

<!-- @segment sn54.12:7.7 -->

I know: “I’ll breathe in observing letting go.” I know: “I’ll breathe out observing letting go.”

<!-- @segment sn54.12:8.1 -->

For if anything should be rightly called

<!-- @segment sn54.12:8.2 -->

“noble meditation”, or else “divine meditation”, or else “a realized one’s meditation”,

<!-- @segment sn54.12:8.3 -->

it’s immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

<!-- @segment sn54.12:8.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn54.12:9.1 -->

For those mendicants who are trainees—who haven’t achieved their heart’s desire, but live aspiring for the supreme sanctuary from the yoke—the development and cultivation of immersion due to mindfulness of breathing leads to the ending of defilements.

<!-- @segment sn54.12:10.1 -->

For those mendicants who are perfected—who have ended the defilements, completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their heart’s goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and are rightly freed through enlightenment—the development and cultivation of immersion due to mindfulness of breathing leads to blissful meditation in this very life, and to mindfulness and awareness.

<!-- @segment sn54.12:11.1 -->

For if anything should be rightly called

<!-- @segment sn54.12:11.2 -->

“noble meditation”, or else “divine meditation”, or else “a realized one’s meditation”,

<!-- @segment sn54.12:11.3 -->

it’s immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.’

<!-- @segment sn54.12:11.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn54.12:11.5 -->

This is another way to understand how

<!-- @segment sn54.12:11.6 -->

the meditation of a trainee and a realized one are different.”
