---
slug: sn54.5
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Fruits (2nd)
---

<!-- @segment sn54.5:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated it’s very fruitful and beneficial.

<!-- @segment sn54.5:1.2 -->

And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated to be very fruitful and beneficial?

<!-- @segment sn54.5:1.3 -->

It’s when a mendicant—gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut—sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight, and brings mindfulness to the present.

<!-- @segment sn54.5:1.4 -->

Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. …

<!-- @segment sn54.5:1.5 -->

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing letting go.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing letting go.’

<!-- @segment sn54.5:1.6 -->

Mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated in this way, is very fruitful and beneficial.

<!-- @segment sn54.5:2.1 -->

When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated in this way you can expect seven fruits and benefits.

<!-- @segment sn54.5:2.2 -->

What seven?

<!-- @segment sn54.5:2.3 -->

You attain enlightenment early on in this very life.

<!-- @segment sn54.5:2.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn54.5:2.5 -->

If not, you attain enlightenment at the time of death.

<!-- @segment sn54.5:2.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn54.5:2.7 -->

If not, with the ending of the five lower fetters you’re extinguished in between one life and the next …

<!-- @segment sn54.5:2.8 -->

you’re extinguished upon landing …

<!-- @segment sn54.5:2.9 -->

you’re extinguished without extra effort …

<!-- @segment sn54.5:2.10 -->

you’re extinguished with extra effort …

<!-- @segment sn54.5:2.11 -->

you head upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha realm …

<!-- @segment sn54.5:2.12 -->

When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated in this way you can expect these seven fruits and benefits.”
