---
slug: sn54.9
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: At Vesālī
---

<!-- @segment sn54.9:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn54.9:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

<!-- @segment sn54.9:1.3 -->

Now at that time the Buddha spoke in many ways to the mendicants about the meditation on ugliness. He praised the meditation on ugliness and its development.

<!-- @segment sn54.9:2.1 -->

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants,

<!-- @segment sn54.9:2.2 -->

“Mendicants, I wish to go on retreat for a fortnight.

<!-- @segment sn54.9:2.3 -->

No-one should approach me, except for the one who brings my almsfood.”

<!-- @segment sn54.9:2.4 -->

“Yes, sir,” replied those mendicants. And no-one approached him, except for the one who brought the almsfood.

<!-- @segment sn54.9:3.1 -->

Then those mendicants thought,

<!-- @segment sn54.9:3.2 -->

“The Buddha spoke in many ways about the meditation on ugliness. He praised the meditation on ugliness and its development.” They committed themselves to developing the many different facets of the meditation on ugliness.

<!-- @segment sn54.9:3.3 -->

Becoming horrified, repelled, and disgusted with this body, they looked for a suicide weapon.

<!-- @segment sn54.9:3.4 -->

Each day ten, twenty, or thirty mendicants committed suicide.

<!-- @segment sn54.9:4.1 -->

Then after a fortnight had passed, the Buddha came out of retreat and addressed Ānanda,

<!-- @segment sn54.9:4.2 -->

“Ānanda, why does the mendicant Saṅgha seem so diminished?”

<!-- @segment sn54.9:4.3 -->

Ānanda told the Buddha all that had happened, and said,

<!-- @segment sn54.9:4.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn54.9:4.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn54.9:4.6 -->

“Sir, please explain another way the mendicant Saṅgha might be settled in enlightenment.”

<!-- @segment sn54.9:5.1 -->

“Well then, Ānanda, gather all the mendicants staying in the vicinity of Vesālī together in the assembly hall.”

<!-- @segment sn54.9:5.2 -->

“Yes, sir,” replied Ānanda. He did what the Buddha asked, went up to him, and said,

<!-- @segment sn54.9:5.3 -->

“Sir, the mendicant Saṅgha has assembled.

<!-- @segment sn54.9:5.4 -->

Please, sir, come at your convenience.”

<!-- @segment sn54.9:6.1 -->

Then the Buddha went to the assembly hall, sat down on the seat spread out,

<!-- @segment sn54.9:6.2 -->

and addressed the mendicants:

<!-- @segment sn54.9:6.3 -->

“Mendicants, when this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated it’s peaceful and sublime, a delectable and blissful meditation. And it disperses and settles unskillful qualities on the spot whenever they arise.

<!-- @segment sn54.9:7.1 -->

In the last month of summer, when the dust and dirt is stirred up, a large storm out of season disperses and settles it on the spot.

<!-- @segment sn54.9:7.2 -->

In the same way, when this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated it’s peaceful and sublime, a delectable and blissful meditation. And it disperses and settles unskillful qualities on the spot whenever they arise.

<!-- @segment sn54.9:7.3 -->

And how is it so developed and cultivated?

<!-- @segment sn54.9:8.1 -->

It’s when a mendicant—gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut—sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight, and brings mindfulness to the present.

<!-- @segment sn54.9:8.2 -->

Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. …

<!-- @segment sn54.9:8.3 -->

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing letting go.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing letting go.’

<!-- @segment sn54.9:8.4 -->

That’s how this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated so that it’s peaceful and sublime, a delectable and blissful meditation. And it disperses and settles unskillful qualities on the spot whenever they arise.”
