---
slug: sn55.7
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The People of Bamboo Gate
---

<!-- @segment sn55.7:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named Bamboo Gate.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:1.3 -->

The brahmins and householders of Bamboo Gate heard:

<!-- @segment sn55.7:1.4 -->

“It seems the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—has arrived at Bamboo Gate, together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:1.5 -->

He has this good reputation:

<!-- @segment sn55.7:1.6 -->

‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’

<!-- @segment sn55.7:1.7 -->

He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:1.8 -->

He proclaims a teaching that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:1.9 -->

It’s good to see such perfected ones.”

<!-- @segment sn55.7:2.1 -->

Then the brahmins and householders of Bamboo Gate went up to the Buddha. Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite conversation, some held up their cupped palms toward the Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent. Seated to one side they said to the Buddha:

<!-- @segment sn55.7:2.2 -->

“Worthy Gotama, these are our wishes, desires, and hopes.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:2.3 -->

We wish to live at home with our children; to use sandalwood imported from Kāsi; to wear garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and to accept gold and currency. And when our body breaks up, after death, we wish to be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:2.4 -->

Given that we have such wishes, may the Buddha teach us the Dhamma so that we may achieve them.”

<!-- @segment sn55.7:3.1 -->

“Householders, I will teach you an explanation of the Dhamma that is relevant for oneself.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:3.2 -->

Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment sn55.7:3.3 -->

“Yes, worthy sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:3.4 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment sn55.7:4.1 -->

“And what is the explanation of the Dhamma that applies to oneself?

<!-- @segment sn55.7:4.2 -->

It’s when a noble disciple reflects:

<!-- @segment sn55.7:4.3 -->

‘I want to live and don’t want to die; I want to be happy and recoil from pain.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:4.4 -->

Since this is so, if someone were to take my life, I wouldn’t like that.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:4.5 -->

But others also want to live and don’t want to die; they want to be happy and recoil from pain. So if I were to take the life of someone else, they wouldn’t like that either.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:4.6 -->

The thing that is disliked by me is also disliked by others.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:4.7 -->

Since I dislike this thing, how can I inflict it on someone else?’

<!-- @segment sn55.7:4.8 -->

Reflecting in this way, they give up killing living creatures themselves. And they encourage others to give up killing living creatures, praising the giving up of killing living creatures.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:4.9 -->

So their bodily behavior is purified in three points.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:5.1 -->

Furthermore, a noble disciple reflects:

<!-- @segment sn55.7:5.2 -->

‘If someone were to steal from me, I wouldn’t like that.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:5.3 -->

But if I were to steal from someone else, they wouldn’t like that either.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:5.4 -->

The thing that is disliked by me is also disliked by others.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:5.5 -->

Since I dislike this thing, how can I inflict it on someone else?’

<!-- @segment sn55.7:5.6 -->

Reflecting in this way, they give up stealing themselves. And they encourage others to give up stealing, praising the giving up of stealing.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:5.7 -->

So their bodily behavior is purified in three points.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:6.1 -->

Furthermore, a noble disciple reflects:

<!-- @segment sn55.7:6.2 -->

‘If someone were to have sexual relations with my wives, I wouldn’t like it.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:6.3 -->

But if I were to have sexual relations with someone else’s wives, he wouldn’t like that either.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:6.4 -->

The thing that is disliked by me is also disliked by others.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:6.5 -->

Since I dislike this thing, how can I inflict it on others?’

<!-- @segment sn55.7:6.6 -->

Reflecting in this way, they give up sexual misconduct themselves. And they encourage others to give up sexual misconduct, praising the giving up of sexual misconduct.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:6.7 -->

So their bodily behavior is purified in three points.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:7.1 -->

Furthermore, a noble disciple reflects:

<!-- @segment sn55.7:7.2 -->

‘If someone were to distort my meaning by lying, I wouldn’t like it.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:7.3 -->

But if I were to distort someone else’s meaning by lying, they wouldn’t like it either.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:7.4 -->

The thing that is disliked by me is also disliked by someone else.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:7.5 -->

Since I dislike this thing, how can I inflict it on others?’

<!-- @segment sn55.7:7.6 -->

Reflecting in this way, they give up lying themselves. And they encourage others to give up lying, praising the giving up of lying.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:7.7 -->

So their verbal behavior is purified in three points.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:8.1 -->

Furthermore, a noble disciple reflects:

<!-- @segment sn55.7:8.2 -->

‘If someone were to break me up from my friends by backbiting, I wouldn’t like it.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:8.3 -->

But if I were to break someone else from their friends by backbiting, they wouldn’t like it either. …’

<!-- @segment sn55.7:8.4 -->

So their verbal behavior is purified in three points.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:9.1 -->

Furthermore, a noble disciple reflects:

<!-- @segment sn55.7:9.2 -->

‘If someone were to attack me with harsh speech, I wouldn’t like it.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:9.3 -->

But if I were to attack someone else with harsh speech, they wouldn’t like it either. …’

<!-- @segment sn55.7:9.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn55.7:9.5 -->

So their verbal behavior is purified in three points.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:10.1 -->

Furthermore, a noble disciple reflects:

<!-- @segment sn55.7:10.2 -->

‘If someone were to annoy me by talking silliness and nonsense, I wouldn’t like it.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:10.3 -->

But if I were to annoy someone else by talking silliness and nonsense, they wouldn’t like it either.’

<!-- @segment sn55.7:10.4 -->

The thing that is disliked by me is also disliked by another.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:10.5 -->

Since I dislike this thing, how can I inflict it on another?’

<!-- @segment sn55.7:10.6 -->

Reflecting in this way, they give up talking nonsense themselves. And they encourage others to give up talking nonsense, praising the giving up of talking nonsense.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:10.7 -->

So their verbal behavior is purified in three points.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:11.1 -->

And they have experiential confidence in the Buddha …

<!-- @segment sn55.7:11.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn55.7:11.3 -->

the teaching …

<!-- @segment sn55.7:11.4 -->

the Saṅgha …

<!-- @segment sn55.7:11.5 -->

And they have the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones … leading to immersion.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:11.6 -->

When a noble disciple possesses these seven good qualities and these four desirable states they may, if they wish, declare of themselves:

<!-- @segment sn55.7:11.7 -->

‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am assured, destined for awakening.’”

<!-- @segment sn55.7:12.1 -->

When he had spoken, the brahmins and householders of Bamboo Gate said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment sn55.7:12.2 -->

“Excellent, worthy Gotama! …

<!-- @segment sn55.7:12.3 -->

We go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment sn55.7:12.4 -->

From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember us as lay followers who have gone for refuge for life.”
