---
slug: sn55.42
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Overflowing Merit (2nd)
---

<!-- @segment sn55.42:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, there are these four kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurture happiness.

<!-- @segment sn55.42:1.2 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment sn55.42:1.3 -->

It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha …

<!-- @segment sn55.42:1.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn55.42:1.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn55.42:2.1 -->

the teaching …

<!-- @segment sn55.42:2.2 -->

the Saṅgha …

<!-- @segment sn55.42:3.1 -->

Furthermore, a noble disciple lives at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share.

<!-- @segment sn55.42:3.2 -->

This is the fourth kind of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurtures happiness.

<!-- @segment sn55.42:3.3 -->

These are the four kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurture happiness.

<!-- @segment sn55.42:4.1 -->

When a noble disciple has these four kinds of overflowing merit and goodness, it’s not easy to count how much merit they have by saying that

<!-- @segment sn55.42:4.2 -->

this is the extent of their overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurtures happiness.

<!-- @segment sn55.42:4.3 -->

It’s simply reckoned as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of merit.

<!-- @segment sn55.42:5.1 -->

There are places where the great rivers—the Ganges, Yamunā, Aciravatī, Sarabhū, and Mahī—join together and converge.

<!-- @segment sn55.42:5.2 -->

It’s not easy to count how much water is in such places by saying

<!-- @segment sn55.42:5.3 -->

how many gallons, how many hundreds, thousands, hundreds of thousands of gallons there are.

<!-- @segment sn55.42:5.4 -->

It’s simply reckoned as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of water.

<!-- @segment sn55.42:5.5 -->

In the same way, when a noble disciple has these four kinds of overflowing merit and goodness, it’s not easy to count how much merit they have by saying that

<!-- @segment sn55.42:5.6 -->

this is the extent of their overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurtures happiness.

<!-- @segment sn55.42:5.7 -->

It’s simply reckoned as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of merit.”

<!-- @segment sn55.42:5.8 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment sn55.42:5.9 -->

Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

<!-- @segment sn55.42:6.1 -->

“Hosts of people use the rivers,

<!-- @segment sn55.42:6.2 -->

and though the rivers are many,

<!-- @segment sn55.42:6.3 -->

all reach the great deep, the boundless ocean,

<!-- @segment sn55.42:6.4 -->

the cruel sea that’s home to precious gems.

<!-- @segment sn55.42:7.1 -->

So too, when a person gives food, drink, and clothes;

<!-- @segment sn55.42:7.2 -->

and they’re a giver of beds, seats, and mats—

<!-- @segment sn55.42:7.3 -->

the streams of merit reach that astute person,

<!-- @segment sn55.42:7.4 -->

as the rivers bring their waters to the sea.”
