---
slug: sn55.3
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Dīghāvu
---

<!-- @segment sn55.3:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground.

<!-- @segment sn55.3:1.2 -->

Now at that time the lay follower Dīghāvu was sick, suffering, gravely ill.

<!-- @segment sn55.3:1.3 -->

Then he addressed his father, the householder Jotika,

<!-- @segment sn55.3:1.4 -->

“Please, householder, go to the Buddha, and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Say to him:

<!-- @segment sn55.3:1.5 -->

‘Sir, the lay follower Dīghāvu is sick, suffering, gravely ill.

<!-- @segment sn55.3:1.6 -->

He bows with his head to your feet.’

<!-- @segment sn55.3:1.7 -->

And then say:

<!-- @segment sn55.3:1.8 -->

‘Sir, please visit him at his home out of sympathy.’”

<!-- @segment sn55.3:1.9 -->

“Yes, dear,” replied Jotika. He did as Dīghāvu asked.

<!-- @segment sn55.3:1.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn55.3:1.11 -->



<!-- @segment sn55.3:1.12 -->



<!-- @segment sn55.3:1.13 -->



<!-- @segment sn55.3:1.14 -->

The Buddha consented with silence.

<!-- @segment sn55.3:2.1 -->

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the home of the lay follower Dīghāvu, sat down on the seat spread out, and said to him,

<!-- @segment sn55.3:2.2 -->

“I hope you’re keeping well, Dīghāvu; I hope you’re all right. I hope that your pain is fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not its growing.”

<!-- @segment sn55.3:2.3 -->

“Sir, I’m not keeping well, I’m not getting by. The pain is terrible and growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its fading.”

<!-- @segment sn55.3:2.4 -->

“So, Dīghāvu, you should train like this:

<!-- @segment sn55.3:2.5 -->

‘I will have experiential confidence in the Buddha …

<!-- @segment sn55.3:2.6 -->

the teaching …

<!-- @segment sn55.3:2.7 -->

the Saṅgha …

<!-- @segment sn55.3:2.8 -->

And I will have the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones … leading to immersion.’

<!-- @segment sn55.3:2.9 -->

That’s how you should train.”

<!-- @segment sn55.3:3.1 -->

“Sir, these four factors of stream-entry that were taught by the Buddha are found in me, and I exhibit them.

<!-- @segment sn55.3:3.2 -->

For I have experiential confidence in the Buddha …

<!-- @segment sn55.3:3.3 -->

the teaching …

<!-- @segment sn55.3:3.4 -->

the Saṅgha …

<!-- @segment sn55.3:3.5 -->

And I have the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones … leading to immersion.”

<!-- @segment sn55.3:3.6 -->

“In that case, Dīghāvu, grounded on these four factors of stream-entry you should further develop these six things that play a part in realization.

<!-- @segment sn55.3:3.7 -->

You should meditate observing the impermanence of all conditions, perceiving suffering in impermanence, perceiving not-self in suffering, perceiving giving up, perceiving fading away, and perceiving cessation.

<!-- @segment sn55.3:3.8 -->

That’s how you should train.”

<!-- @segment sn55.3:4.1 -->

“These six things that play a part in realization that were taught by the Buddha are found in me, and I exhibit them.

<!-- @segment sn55.3:4.2 -->

For I meditate observing the impermanence of all conditions, perceiving suffering in impermanence, perceiving not-self in suffering, perceiving giving up, perceiving fading away, and perceiving cessation.

<!-- @segment sn55.3:4.3 -->

But still, sir, I think,

<!-- @segment sn55.3:4.4 -->

‘I hope Jotika doesn’t suffer distress when I’ve gone.’”

<!-- @segment sn55.3:4.5 -->

Jotika said, “Dear Dīghāvu, don’t focus on that.

<!-- @segment sn55.3:4.6 -->

Come on, dear Dīghāvu, you should closely focus on what the Buddha is saying.”

<!-- @segment sn55.3:5.1 -->

When the Buddha had given this advice he rose from his seat and left.

<!-- @segment sn55.3:5.2 -->

Not long after the Buddha left, Dīghāvu passed away.

<!-- @segment sn55.3:5.3 -->

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

<!-- @segment sn55.3:5.4 -->

“Sir, the lay follower named Dīghāvu, who was advised in brief by the Buddha, has passed away.

<!-- @segment sn55.3:5.5 -->

Where has he been reborn in his next life?”

<!-- @segment sn55.3:5.6 -->

“Mendicants, the lay follower Dīghāvu was astute. He practiced in line with the teaching, and did not trouble me about the teachings.

<!-- @segment sn55.3:5.7 -->

With the ending of the five lower fetters, he’s been reborn spontaneously, and will become extinguished there, not liable to return from that world.”
