---
slug: sn55.5
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Sāriputta (2nd)
---

<!-- @segment sn55.5:1.1 -->

Then Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

<!-- @segment sn55.5:1.2 -->

“Sāriputta, they speak of a ‘factor for stream-entry’.

<!-- @segment sn55.5:1.3 -->

What is a factor for stream-entry?”

<!-- @segment sn55.5:1.4 -->

“Sir, the factors for stream-entry are associating with true persons, listening to the true teaching, rational application of mind, and practicing in line with the teaching.”

<!-- @segment sn55.5:1.5 -->

“Good, good, Sāriputta!

<!-- @segment sn55.5:1.6 -->

For the factors for stream-entry are associating with true persons, listening to the true teaching, rational application of mind, and practicing in line with the teaching.

<!-- @segment sn55.5:2.1 -->

Sāriputta, they speak of ‘the stream’.

<!-- @segment sn55.5:2.2 -->

What is the stream?”

<!-- @segment sn55.5:2.3 -->

“Sir, the stream is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:

<!-- @segment sn55.5:2.4 -->

right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.”

<!-- @segment sn55.5:2.5 -->

“Good, good, Sāriputta!

<!-- @segment sn55.5:2.6 -->

For the stream is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:

<!-- @segment sn55.5:2.7 -->

right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

<!-- @segment sn55.5:3.1 -->

Sāriputta, they speak of ‘a stream-enterer’.

<!-- @segment sn55.5:3.2 -->

What is a stream-enterer?”

<!-- @segment sn55.5:3.3 -->

“Sir, anyone who possesses this noble eightfold path is called a stream-enterer, the venerable of such and such name and clan.”

<!-- @segment sn55.5:3.4 -->

“Good, good, Sāriputta!

<!-- @segment sn55.5:3.5 -->

For anyone who possesses this noble eightfold path is called a stream-enterer, the venerable of such and such name and clan.”
