---
slug: sn55.8
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: In the Brick Hall (1st)
description: The Buddha teaches the four factors of stream-entry—experiential confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and ethical conduct loved by the noble ones—showing how they protect a noble disciple from loss and lead to heaven, regarding in the brick hall (1st).
qualities: harm, liberation, ending, ethical conduct, insight, wisdom
theme: inspiration, story
---

<!-- @segment sn55.8:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn55.8:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying at Ñātika in the brick house.

<!-- @segment sn55.8:1.3 -->

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

<!-- @segment sn55.8:2.1 -->

“Sir, the monk named Sāḷha has passed away.

<!-- @segment sn55.8:2.2 -->

Where has he been reborn in his next life?

<!-- @segment sn55.8:2.3 -->

The nun named Nandā,

<!-- @segment sn55.8:2.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn55.8:2.5 -->

the layman named Sudatta,

<!-- @segment sn55.8:2.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn55.8:2.7 -->

and the laywoman named Sujātā have passed away.

<!-- @segment sn55.8:2.8 -->

Where have they been reborn in the next life?”

<!-- @segment sn55.8:3.1 -->

“Ānanda, the monk Sāḷha passed away having realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, having realized it with his own insight due to the ending of defilements.

<!-- @segment sn55.8:3.2 -->

The nun Nandā passed away having ended the five lower fetters. She’s been reborn spontaneously, and will be extinguished there, not liable to return from that world.

<!-- @segment sn55.8:3.3 -->

The layman Sudatta passed away having ended three fetters, and weakened greed, hate, and delusion. He’s a once-returner; he will come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering.

<!-- @segment sn55.8:3.4 -->

The laywoman Sujātā passed away having ended three fetters. She’s a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, assured, destined for awakening.

<!-- @segment sn55.8:4.1 -->

It’s no wonder that a human being should pass away.

<!-- @segment sn55.8:4.2 -->

But if you should come and ask me about it each and every time someone dies that would be a bother for me.

<!-- @segment sn55.8:4.3 -->

So Ānanda, I will teach you the explanation of the Dhamma named ‘the mirror of the teaching’. A noble disciple who has this may declare of themselves:

<!-- @segment sn55.8:4.4 -->

‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am assured, destined for awakening.’

<!-- @segment sn55.8:5.1 -->

And what is that mirror of the teaching?

<!-- @segment sn55.8:5.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn55.8:6.1 -->

It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha …

<!-- @segment sn55.8:6.2 -->

the teaching …

<!-- @segment sn55.8:6.3 -->

the Saṅgha …

<!-- @segment sn55.8:6.4 -->

And they have the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones … leading to immersion.

<!-- @segment sn55.8:6.5 -->

This is that mirror of the teaching.

<!-- @segment sn55.8:6.6 -->

A noble disciple who has this may declare of themselves:

<!-- @segment sn55.8:6.7 -->

‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am assured, destined for awakening.’”

<!-- @segment sn55.8:6.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn55.8:6.9 -->

(The following two discourses have the same setting.)
