---
slug: sn55.21
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Mahānāma (1st)
description: The Buddha teaches on the factors of stream-entry regarding with mahānāma (1st), showing how confidence in the Triple Gem and noble ethics lead to liberation from loss.
qualities: fear, harm, faith, wisdom, giving, ending
theme: inspiration, story
---

<!-- @segment sn55.21:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment sn55.21:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery.

<!-- @segment sn55.21:1.3 -->

Then Mahānāma the Sakyan went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

<!-- @segment sn55.21:1.4 -->

“Sir, this Kapilavatthu is successful and prosperous, populous, full of people, with cramped cul-de-sacs.

<!-- @segment sn55.21:1.5 -->

In the late afternoon, after paying homage to the Buddha or an esteemed mendicant, I enter Kapilavatthu.

<!-- @segment sn55.21:1.6 -->

I encounter a stray elephant,

<!-- @segment sn55.21:1.7 -->

horse,

<!-- @segment sn55.21:1.8 -->

chariot,

<!-- @segment sn55.21:1.9 -->

cart,

<!-- @segment sn55.21:1.10 -->

or person.

<!-- @segment sn55.21:1.11 -->

At that time I lose mindfulness regarding the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment sn55.21:1.12 -->

I think:

<!-- @segment sn55.21:1.13 -->

‘If I were to die at this time, where would I be reborn in my next life?’”

<!-- @segment sn55.21:2.1 -->

“Do not fear, Mahānāma, do not fear!

<!-- @segment sn55.21:2.2 -->

Your death will not be a bad one; your passing will not be a bad one.

<!-- @segment sn55.21:2.3 -->

Take someone whose mind has for a long time been imbued with faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. Their body is formed, made up of the four principal states, produced by mother and father, built up from rice and porridge, liable to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and destruction.

<!-- @segment sn55.21:2.4 -->

Right here the crows, vultures, hawks, hounds, jackals, and many kinds of little creatures devour it.

<!-- @segment sn55.21:2.5 -->

But their mind rises up, headed for a higher place.

<!-- @segment sn55.21:3.1 -->

Suppose a person was to sink a pot of ghee or oil into a deep lake and break it open.

<!-- @segment sn55.21:3.2 -->

Its shards and chips would sink down, while the ghee or oil in it would rise up, headed for a higher place.

<!-- @segment sn55.21:3.3 -->

In the same way, take someone whose mind has for a long time been imbued with faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. Their body consists of form, made up of the four principal states, produced by mother and father, built up from rice and porridge, liable to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and destruction.

<!-- @segment sn55.21:3.4 -->

Right here the crows, vultures, hawks, hounds, jackals, and many kinds of little creatures devour it.

<!-- @segment sn55.21:3.5 -->

But their mind rises up, headed for a higher place.

<!-- @segment sn55.21:3.6 -->

Your mind, Mahānāma, has for a long time been imbued with faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom.

<!-- @segment sn55.21:3.7 -->

Do not fear, Mahānāma, do not fear!

<!-- @segment sn55.21:3.8 -->

Your death will not be a bad one; your passing will not be a bad one.”
