---
slug: sn55.10
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: At the Brick Hall (3rd)
---

<!-- @segment sn55.10:1.1 -->

Ānanda said to the Buddha:

<!-- @segment sn55.10:1.2 -->

“Sir, the layman named Kakkaṭa has passed away in Ñātika.

<!-- @segment sn55.10:1.3 -->

Where has he been reborn in his next life?

<!-- @segment sn55.10:1.4 -->

The laymen named Kaḷibha,

<!-- @segment sn55.10:1.5 -->

Nikata,

<!-- @segment sn55.10:1.6 -->

Kaṭissaha,

<!-- @segment sn55.10:1.7 -->

Tuṭṭha,

<!-- @segment sn55.10:1.8 -->

Santuṭṭha,

<!-- @segment sn55.10:1.9 -->

Bhadda, and

<!-- @segment sn55.10:1.10 -->

Subhadda have passed away in Ñātika.

<!-- @segment sn55.10:1.11 -->

Where have they been reborn in the next life?”

<!-- @segment sn55.10:2.1 -->

“Ānanda, the laymen Kakkaṭa,

<!-- @segment sn55.10:2.2 -->

Kaḷibha,

<!-- @segment sn55.10:2.3 -->

Nikata,

<!-- @segment sn55.10:2.4 -->

Kaṭissaha,

<!-- @segment sn55.10:2.5 -->

Tuṭṭha,

<!-- @segment sn55.10:2.6 -->

Santuṭṭha,

<!-- @segment sn55.10:2.7 -->

Bhadda,

<!-- @segment sn55.10:2.8 -->

and Subhadda passed away having ended the five lower fetters. They’ve been reborn spontaneously, and will be extinguished there, not liable to return from that world.

<!-- @segment sn55.10:2.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn55.10:3.1 -->

Over fifty laymen in Ñātika have passed away having ended the five lower fetters. They’ve been reborn spontaneously, and will be extinguished there, not liable to return from that world.

<!-- @segment sn55.10:3.2 -->

More than ninety laymen in Ñātika have passed away having ended three fetters, and weakened greed, hate, and delusion. They’re once-returners, who will come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering.

<!-- @segment sn55.10:3.3 -->

More than five hundred laymen in Ñātika have passed away having ended three fetters. They’re stream-enterers, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, assured, destined for awakening.

<!-- @segment sn55.10:4.1 -->

It’s no wonder that a human being should pass away.

<!-- @segment sn55.10:4.2 -->

But if you should come and ask me about it each and every time someone passes away, that would be a bother for me.

<!-- @segment sn55.10:4.3 -->

So Ānanda, I will teach you the explanation of the Dhamma named ‘the mirror of the teaching’. A noble disciple who has this may declare of themselves:

<!-- @segment sn55.10:4.4 -->

‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am assured, destined for awakening.’

<!-- @segment sn55.10:5.1 -->

And what is that mirror of the teaching?

<!-- @segment sn55.10:5.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn55.10:6.1 -->

It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha …

<!-- @segment sn55.10:6.2 -->

the teaching …

<!-- @segment sn55.10:6.3 -->

the Saṅgha …

<!-- @segment sn55.10:6.4 -->

And they have the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones … leading to immersion.

<!-- @segment sn55.10:6.5 -->

This is that mirror of the teaching.

<!-- @segment sn55.10:6.6 -->

A noble disciple who has this may declare of themselves:

<!-- @segment sn55.10:6.7 -->

‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am assured, destined for awakening.’”

<!-- @segment sn55.10:6.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn55.10:6.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn55.10:7.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn55.10:7.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn55.10:7.3 -->
