---
slug: sn55.28
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Fears and Enmities (1st)
description: The Buddha teaches the four factors of stream-entry—experiential confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and ethical conduct loved by the noble ones—showing how they protect a noble disciple from loss and lead to heaven, regarding fears and enmities (1st).
qualities: suffering, displeasure, wisdom, craving, fear, attachment
theme: inspiration, story
---

<!-- @segment sn55.28:1.1 -->

At Sāvatthī.

<!-- @segment sn55.28:1.2 -->

Seated to one side, the Buddha said to the householder Anāthapiṇḍika:

<!-- @segment sn55.28:1.3 -->

“Householder, when a noble disciple has quelled five fears and enmities, possesses the four factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and penetrated the noble system with wisdom, they may, if they wish, declare of themselves:

<!-- @segment sn55.28:1.4 -->

‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am assured, destined for awakening.’

<!-- @segment sn55.28:2.1 -->

What are the five fears and enmities they have quelled?

<!-- @segment sn55.28:2.2 -->

Anyone who kills living creatures brims with fear and enmity both in this life and in lives to come, and experiences mental pain and sadness.

<!-- @segment sn55.28:2.3 -->

So that fear and enmity is quelled for anyone who refrains from killing living creatures.

<!-- @segment sn55.28:2.4 -->

Anyone who steals …

<!-- @segment sn55.28:2.5 -->

Anyone who commits sexual misconduct …

<!-- @segment sn55.28:2.6 -->

Anyone who lies …

<!-- @segment sn55.28:2.7 -->

Anyone who consumes intoxicants of beer, wine, and liquor brims with fear and enmity both in this life and in lives to come, and experiences mental pain and sadness.

<!-- @segment sn55.28:2.8 -->

So that fear and enmity is quelled for anyone who refrains from intoxicants of beer, wine, and liquor.

<!-- @segment sn55.28:2.9 -->

These are the five fears and enmities they have quelled.

<!-- @segment sn55.28:3.1 -->

What are the four factors of stream-entry that they possess?

<!-- @segment sn55.28:3.2 -->

It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha …

<!-- @segment sn55.28:3.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn55.28:3.4 -->

the teaching …

<!-- @segment sn55.28:3.5 -->

the Saṅgha …

<!-- @segment sn55.28:3.6 -->

And they have the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones … leading to immersion.

<!-- @segment sn55.28:3.7 -->

These are the four factors of stream-entry that they possess.

<!-- @segment sn55.28:4.1 -->

And what is the noble system that they have clearly seen and penetrated with wisdom?

<!-- @segment sn55.28:4.2 -->

A noble disciple rationally applies the mind to dependent origination itself:

<!-- @segment sn55.28:4.3 -->

‘When this exists, this comes to be; due to the arising of this, this arises.

<!-- @segment sn55.28:4.4 -->

When this doesn’t exist, this doesn’t come to be; due to the cessation of this, this ceases.' That is:

<!-- @segment sn55.28:4.5 -->

Ignorance is a requirement for choices. Choices are a requirement for consciousness. Consciousness is a requirement for name and form. Name and form are requirements for the six sense fields. The six sense fields are requirements for contact. Contact is a requirement for feeling. Feeling is a requirement for craving. Craving is a requirement for grasping. Grasping is a requirement for continued existence. Continued existence is a requirement for rebirth. Rebirth is a requirement for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be.

<!-- @segment sn55.28:4.6 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

<!-- @segment sn55.28:4.7 -->

When ignorance fades away and ceases no residue left behind, choices cease. When choices cease, consciousness ceases. When consciousness ceases, name and form cease. When name and form cease, the six sense fields cease. When the six sense fields cease, contact ceases. When contact ceases, feeling ceases. When feeling ceases, craving ceases. When craving ceases, grasping ceases. When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases. When rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease.

<!-- @segment sn55.28:4.8 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.

<!-- @segment sn55.28:4.9 -->

This is the noble system that they have clearly seen and penetrated with wisdom.

<!-- @segment sn55.28:5.1 -->

When a noble disciple has quelled five fears and enmities, possesses the four factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and penetrated the noble system with wisdom, they may, if they wish, declare of themselves:

<!-- @segment sn55.28:5.2 -->

‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am assured, destined for awakening.’”
