---
slug: sn56.13
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Aggregates
---

<!-- @segment sn56.13:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, there are these four noble truths.

<!-- @segment sn56.13:1.2 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment sn56.13:1.3 -->

The noble truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.

<!-- @segment sn56.13:2.1 -->

And what is the noble truth of suffering?

<!-- @segment sn56.13:2.2 -->

You should say: ‘The five grasping aggregates’.

<!-- @segment sn56.13:2.3 -->

That is: form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

<!-- @segment sn56.13:2.4 -->

This is called the noble truth of suffering.

<!-- @segment sn56.13:3.1 -->

And what is the noble truth of the origin of suffering?

<!-- @segment sn56.13:3.2 -->

It’s the craving that leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure there wherever it alights. That is,

<!-- @segment sn56.13:3.3 -->

craving for sensual pleasures, craving for existence, and craving for nonexistence.

<!-- @segment sn56.13:3.4 -->

This is called the noble truth of the origin of suffering.

<!-- @segment sn56.13:4.1 -->

And what is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering?

<!-- @segment sn56.13:4.2 -->

It’s the fading away and cessation of that very same craving no residue left behind; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not clinging to it.

<!-- @segment sn56.13:4.3 -->

This is called the noble truth of the cessation of suffering.

<!-- @segment sn56.13:5.1 -->

And what is the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering?

<!-- @segment sn56.13:5.2 -->

It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:

<!-- @segment sn56.13:5.3 -->

right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

<!-- @segment sn56.13:5.4 -->

This is called the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.

<!-- @segment sn56.13:5.5 -->

These are the four noble truths.

<!-- @segment sn56.13:6.1 -->

That’s why you should practice meditation to understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’.”
