---
slug: sn56.42
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: A Cliff
---

<!-- @segment sn56.42:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain.

<!-- @segment sn56.42:1.2 -->

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants,

<!-- @segment sn56.42:1.3 -->

“Come, mendicants, let’s go to Inspiration Peak for the day’s meditation.”

<!-- @segment sn56.42:1.4 -->

“Yes, sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment sn56.42:1.5 -->

Then the Buddha together with several mendicants went to Inspiration Peak.

<!-- @segment sn56.42:1.6 -->

A certain mendicant saw the big cliff there

<!-- @segment sn56.42:1.7 -->

and said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment sn56.42:1.8 -->

“Sir, that big cliff is really huge and scary.

<!-- @segment sn56.42:1.9 -->

Is there any other cliff bigger and scarier than this one?”

<!-- @segment sn56.42:1.10 -->

“There is, mendicant.”

<!-- @segment sn56.42:2.1 -->

“But sir, what is it?”

<!-- @segment sn56.42:2.2 -->

“Mendicant, there are ascetics and brahmins who don’t truly understand about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.

<!-- @segment sn56.42:2.3 -->

They take pleasure in choices that lead to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

<!-- @segment sn56.42:2.4 -->

Since they take pleasure in such choices, they continue to make them.

<!-- @segment sn56.42:2.5 -->

Having made choices that lead to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress, they fall down the cliff of rebirth, old age, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

<!-- @segment sn56.42:2.6 -->

They’re not freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

<!-- @segment sn56.42:2.7 -->

They’re not freed from suffering, I say.

<!-- @segment sn56.42:3.1 -->

There are ascetics and brahmins who truly understand about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.

<!-- @segment sn56.42:3.2 -->

They don’t take pleasure in choices that lead to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

<!-- @segment sn56.42:3.3 -->

Since they don’t take pleasure in such choices, they stop making them.

<!-- @segment sn56.42:3.4 -->

Having stopped making choices that lead to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress, they don’t fall down the cliff of rebirth, old age, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

<!-- @segment sn56.42:3.5 -->

They’re freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

<!-- @segment sn56.42:3.6 -->

They’re freed from suffering, I say.

<!-- @segment sn56.42:4.1 -->

That’s why you should practice meditation …”
