---
slug: sn56.43
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Great Scorching
---

<!-- @segment sn56.43:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, there is a hell called ‘The Great Scorching’.

<!-- @segment sn56.43:1.2 -->

There, whatever sight you see with your eye is unlikable, not likable; undesirable, not desirable; unpleasant, not pleasant.

<!-- @segment sn56.43:1.3 -->

Whatever sound you hear … Whatever odor you smell … Whatever flavor you taste …

<!-- @segment sn56.43:1.4 -->

Whatever touch you feel …

<!-- @segment sn56.43:1.5 -->

Whatever idea you know with your mind is unlikable, not likable; undesirable, not desirable; unpleasant, not pleasant.”

<!-- @segment sn56.43:2.1 -->

When he said this, one of the mendicants said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment sn56.43:2.2 -->

“Sir, that scorching really is mighty, so very mighty.

<!-- @segment sn56.43:2.3 -->

Is there any other scorching more mighty and terrifying than this one?”

<!-- @segment sn56.43:2.4 -->

“There is, mendicant.”

<!-- @segment sn56.43:3.1 -->

“But sir, what is it?”

<!-- @segment sn56.43:3.2 -->

“Mendicants, there are ascetics and brahmins who don’t truly understand about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.

<!-- @segment sn56.43:3.3 -->

They take pleasure in choices that lead to rebirth …

<!-- @segment sn56.43:3.4 -->

They continue to make such choices …

<!-- @segment sn56.43:3.5 -->

Having made such choices, they burn with the scorching of rebirth, old age, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

<!-- @segment sn56.43:3.6 -->

They’re not freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

<!-- @segment sn56.43:3.7 -->

They’re not freed from suffering, I say.

<!-- @segment sn56.43:4.1 -->

There are ascetics and brahmins who truly understand about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.

<!-- @segment sn56.43:4.2 -->

They don’t take pleasure in choices that lead to rebirth …

<!-- @segment sn56.43:4.3 -->

They stop making such choices …

<!-- @segment sn56.43:4.4 -->

Having stopped making such choices, they don’t burn with the scorching of rebirth, old age, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

<!-- @segment sn56.43:4.5 -->

They’re freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

<!-- @segment sn56.43:4.6 -->

They’re freed from suffering, I say.

<!-- @segment sn56.43:5.1 -->

That’s why you should practice meditation …”
