---
slug: sn56.45
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Splitting Hairs
description: The Buddha teaches the four noble truths regarding splitting hairs, urging mendicants to practice for direct knowledge of suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.
qualities: tame, suffering, cultivation, ending, jhana
theme: principle, story
---

<!-- @segment sn56.45:1.1 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

<!-- @segment sn56.45:1.2 -->

Then Venerable Ānanda robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Vesālī for alms.

<!-- @segment sn56.45:1.3 -->

He saw several Licchavi youths practicing archery near the town hall. They were shooting arrows from a distance through a small keyhole, shaft after shaft without missing.

<!-- @segment sn56.45:1.4 -->

When he saw this he thought,

<!-- @segment sn56.45:1.5 -->

“These Licchavi youths really are trained, so well trained,

<!-- @segment sn56.45:1.6 -->

in that they shoot arrows from a distance through a small keyhole, shaft after shaft without missing.”

<!-- @segment sn56.45:2.1 -->

Then Ānanda wandered for alms in Vesālī. After the meal, on his return from almsround, he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened.

<!-- @segment sn56.45:2.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn56.45:2.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn56.45:2.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn56.45:2.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn56.45:2.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn56.45:3.1 -->

“What do you think, Ānanda?

<!-- @segment sn56.45:3.2 -->

Which is harder and more challenging:

<!-- @segment sn56.45:3.3 -->

to shoot arrows from a distance through a small keyhole, shaft after shaft without missing? Or to take a horsehair split into seven strands and penetrate one tip with another tip?”

<!-- @segment sn56.45:3.4 -->

“It’s more difficult and challenging, sir, to take a horsehair split into seven strands and penetrate one tip with another tip.”

<!-- @segment sn56.45:3.5 -->

“Still, Ānanda, those who truly penetrate suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path penetrate something tougher than that.

<!-- @segment sn56.45:4.1 -->

That’s why you should practice meditation …”
