---
slug: sn56.46
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Darkness
---

<!-- @segment sn56.46:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, the boundless gloom of interstellar space is so utterly dark that even the luminosity of the moon and the sun, so mighty and powerful, makes no impression.”

<!-- @segment sn56.46:2.1 -->

When he said this, one of the mendicants asked the Buddha,

<!-- @segment sn56.46:2.2 -->

“Sir, that darkness really is mighty, so very mighty.

<!-- @segment sn56.46:2.3 -->

Is there any other darkness more mighty and terrifying than this one?”

<!-- @segment sn56.46:2.4 -->

“There is, mendicant.”

<!-- @segment sn56.46:3.1 -->

“But sir, what is it?”

<!-- @segment sn56.46:3.2 -->

“There are ascetics and brahmins who don’t truly understand about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.

<!-- @segment sn56.46:3.3 -->

They take pleasure in choices that lead to rebirth …

<!-- @segment sn56.46:3.4 -->

They continue to make such choices …

<!-- @segment sn56.46:3.5 -->

Having made such choices, they fall into the darkness of rebirth, old age, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

<!-- @segment sn56.46:3.6 -->

They’re not freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

<!-- @segment sn56.46:3.7 -->

They’re not freed from suffering, I say.

<!-- @segment sn56.46:4.1 -->

There are ascetics and brahmins who truly understand about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.

<!-- @segment sn56.46:4.2 -->

They don’t take pleasure in choices that lead to rebirth …

<!-- @segment sn56.46:4.3 -->

They stop making such choices …

<!-- @segment sn56.46:4.4 -->

Having stopped making such choices, they don’t fall into the darkness of rebirth, old age, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

<!-- @segment sn56.46:4.5 -->

They’re freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

<!-- @segment sn56.46:4.6 -->

They’re freed from suffering, I say.

<!-- @segment sn56.46:5.1 -->

That’s why you should practice meditation …”
