---
slug: sn56.40
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Looking For a Debate
---

<!-- @segment sn56.40:1.1 -->

“Mendicants, take any mendicant who truly understands: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’.

<!-- @segment sn56.40:1.2 -->

An ascetic or brahmin might come from the east, west, north, or south wanting to debate, seeking a debate, thinking:

<!-- @segment sn56.40:1.3 -->

‘I’ll refute their doctrine!’ It’s simply impossible for them to legitimately make that mendicant shake or rock or tremble.

<!-- @segment sn56.40:1.4 -->



<!-- @segment sn56.40:1.5 -->



<!-- @segment sn56.40:1.6 -->



<!-- @segment sn56.40:1.7 -->



<!-- @segment sn56.40:2.1 -->

Suppose there was a stone post, sixteen feet long.

<!-- @segment sn56.40:2.2 -->

Eight feet were buried underground, and eight above ground.

<!-- @segment sn56.40:2.3 -->

Even if violent storms were to blow up out of the east, the west, the north, and the south, they couldn’t make it shake or rock or tremble.

<!-- @segment sn56.40:2.4 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment sn56.40:2.5 -->

It’s because that stone post is firmly embedded, with deep foundations.

<!-- @segment sn56.40:2.6 -->

In the same way, take any mendicant who truly understands: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’.

<!-- @segment sn56.40:2.7 -->

An ascetic or brahmin might come from the east, west, north, or south wanting to debate, seeking a debate, thinking: ‘I’ll refute their doctrine!’ It’s simply impossible for them to legitimately make that mendicant shake or rock or tremble.

<!-- @segment sn56.40:2.8 -->



<!-- @segment sn56.40:2.9 -->



<!-- @segment sn56.40:2.10 -->



<!-- @segment sn56.40:2.11 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment sn56.40:2.12 -->

It’s because they have clearly seen the four noble truths.

<!-- @segment sn56.40:2.13 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment sn56.40:2.14 -->

The noble truths of suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.

<!-- @segment sn56.40:3.1 -->

That’s why you should practice meditation …”

<!-- @segment sn56.40:3.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn56.40:3.3 -->



<!-- @segment sn56.40:4.1 -->



<!-- @segment sn56.40:4.2 -->



<!-- @segment sn56.40:4.3 -->
