---
slug: dn12
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Lohicca
---

<!-- @segment dn12:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment dn12:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of five hundred mendicants when he arrived at Sālavatikā.

<!-- @segment dn12:1.3 -->

Now at that time the brahmin Lohicca was living in Sālavatikā. It was a crown property given by King Pasenadi of Kosala, teeming with living creatures, full of hay, wood, water, and grain, a royal park endowed to a brahmin.

<!-- @segment dn12:2.1 -->

Now at that time Lohicca had the following harmful misconception:

<!-- @segment dn12:2.2 -->

“Should an ascetic or brahmin achieve some skillful quality, they ought not inform anyone else. For what can one person do for another?

<!-- @segment dn12:2.3 -->

Suppose someone cut off an old bond, only to create another new bond.

<!-- @segment dn12:2.4 -->

That’s the consequence of such a wicked, greedy deed, I say. For what can one person do for another?”

<!-- @segment dn12:3.1 -->

Lohicca heard:

<!-- @segment dn12:3.2 -->

“It seems the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—has arrived at Sālavatikā, together with a large Saṅgha of five hundred mendicants.

<!-- @segment dn12:3.3 -->

He has this good reputation:

<!-- @segment dn12:3.4 -->

‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’

<!-- @segment dn12:3.5 -->

He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others.

<!-- @segment dn12:3.6 -->

He proclaims a teaching that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure.

<!-- @segment dn12:3.7 -->

It’s good to see such perfected ones.”

<!-- @segment dn12:4.1 -->

Then Lohicca addressed his barber Rosika,

<!-- @segment dn12:4.2 -->

“Here, dear Rosika, go to the ascetic Gotama and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Ask him if he is healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably.

<!-- @segment dn12:4.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:4.4 -->

And then ask him whether he,

<!-- @segment dn12:4.5 -->

together with the mendicant Saṅgha, would please accept tomorrow’s meal from the brahmin Lohicca.”

<!-- @segment dn12:5.1 -->

“Yes, worthy sir,” Rosika replied. He did as he was asked, and

<!-- @segment dn12:5.2 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:5.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:5.4 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:5.5 -->

the Buddha consented with silence.

<!-- @segment dn12:6.1 -->

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, Rosika rose from his seat, went to Lohicca, and said to him,

<!-- @segment dn12:6.2 -->

“I gave the Buddha your message,

<!-- @segment dn12:6.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:6.4 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:6.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:6.6 -->

and he accepted.”

<!-- @segment dn12:7.1 -->

And when the night had passed Lohicca had delicious fresh and cooked foods prepared in his own home. Then he had the Buddha informed of the time, saying,

<!-- @segment dn12:7.2 -->

“Here, dear Rosika, go to the ascetic Gotama and announce the time, saying:

<!-- @segment dn12:7.3 -->

‘It’s time, worthy Gotama, the meal is ready.’”

<!-- @segment dn12:7.4 -->

“Yes, worthy sir,” Rosika replied. He did as he was asked.

<!-- @segment dn12:7.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:7.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:7.7 -->

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to Sālavatikā together with the Saṅgha of mendicants.

<!-- @segment dn12:8.1 -->

Now, Rosika was following behind the Buddha,

<!-- @segment dn12:8.2 -->

and told him of Lohicca’s views, adding,

<!-- @segment dn12:8.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:8.4 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:8.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:8.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:8.7 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:8.8 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:8.9 -->

“Sir, please dissuade him from that harmful misconception.”

<!-- @segment dn12:8.10 -->

“Hopefully that’ll happen, Rosika, hopefully that’ll happen.”

<!-- @segment dn12:9.1 -->

Then the Buddha approached Lohicca’s home, where he sat on the seat spread out.

<!-- @segment dn12:9.2 -->

Then Lohicca served and satisfied the mendicant Saṅgha headed by the Buddha with his own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods.

<!-- @segment dn12:9.3.0 -->

1. Questioning Lohicca

<!-- @segment dn12:9.4 -->

When the Buddha had eaten and washed his hand and bowl, Lohicca took a low seat and sat to one side.

<!-- @segment dn12:9.5 -->

The Buddha said to him,

<!-- @segment dn12:9.6 -->

“Is it really true, Lohicca, that you have such a harmful misconception:

<!-- @segment dn12:9.7 -->

‘Should an ascetic or brahmin achieve some skillful quality, they ought not inform anyone else. For what can one person do for another?

<!-- @segment dn12:9.8 -->

Suppose someone cut off an old bond, only to create another new bond.

<!-- @segment dn12:9.9 -->

That’s the consequence of such a wicked, greedy deed, I say. For what can one person do for another?’”

<!-- @segment dn12:9.10 -->

“Yes, worthy Gotama.”

<!-- @segment dn12:10.1 -->

“What do you think, Lohicca?

<!-- @segment dn12:10.2 -->

Do you reside in Sālavatikā?”

<!-- @segment dn12:10.3 -->

“Yes, worthy Gotama.”

<!-- @segment dn12:10.4 -->

“Lohicca, suppose someone were to say:

<!-- @segment dn12:10.5 -->

‘The brahmin Lohicca resides in Sālavatikā.

<!-- @segment dn12:10.6 -->

He alone should enjoy the revenues produced in Sālavatikā and not share them with anyone else.’

<!-- @segment dn12:10.7 -->

Would the one who spoke like that make it difficult for those whose living depends on you or not?”

<!-- @segment dn12:10.8 -->

“They would, worthy Gotama.”

<!-- @segment dn12:10.9 -->

“But is someone who creates difficulties for others acting kindly or unkindly?”

<!-- @segment dn12:10.10 -->

“Unkindly, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn12:10.11 -->

“But does an unkind person have love in their heart or hostility?”

<!-- @segment dn12:10.12 -->

“Hostility, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn12:10.13 -->

“And when the heart is full of hostility, is there right view or wrong view?”

<!-- @segment dn12:10.14 -->

“Wrong view, worthy Gotama.”

<!-- @segment dn12:10.15 -->

“An individual with wrong view is reborn in one of two places, I say:

<!-- @segment dn12:10.16 -->

hell or the animal realm.

<!-- @segment dn12:11.1 -->

What do you think, Lohicca?

<!-- @segment dn12:11.2 -->

Does King Pasenadi reign over Kāsi and Kosala?”

<!-- @segment dn12:11.3 -->

“Yes, worthy Gotama.”

<!-- @segment dn12:11.4 -->

“Lohicca, suppose someone were to say:

<!-- @segment dn12:11.5 -->

‘King Pasenadi reigns over Kāsi and Kosala.

<!-- @segment dn12:11.6 -->

He alone should enjoy the revenues produced in Kāsi and Kosala and not share them with anyone else.’

<!-- @segment dn12:11.7 -->

Would the one who spoke like that make it difficult for yourself and others whose living depends on King Pasenadi or not?”

<!-- @segment dn12:11.8 -->

“They would, worthy Gotama.”

<!-- @segment dn12:11.9 -->

“But is someone who creates difficulties for others acting kindly or unkindly?”

<!-- @segment dn12:11.10 -->

“Unkindly, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn12:11.11 -->

“But does an unkind person have love in their heart or hostility?”

<!-- @segment dn12:11.12 -->

“Hostility, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn12:11.13 -->

“And when the heart is full of hostility, is there right view or wrong view?”

<!-- @segment dn12:11.14 -->

“Wrong view, worthy Gotama.”

<!-- @segment dn12:11.15 -->

“An individual with wrong view is reborn in one of two places, I say:

<!-- @segment dn12:11.16 -->

hell or the animal realm.

<!-- @segment dn12:12.1 -->

So it seems, Lohicca, that should someone say such a thing either of Lohicca or of King Pasenadi,

<!-- @segment dn12:12.2 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:12.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:13.1 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:13.2 -->

that is wrong view.

<!-- @segment dn12:13.3 -->

In the same way, suppose someone were to say:

<!-- @segment dn12:13.4 -->

‘Should an ascetic or brahmin achieve some skillful quality, they ought not inform anyone else. For what can one person do for another?

<!-- @segment dn12:13.5 -->

Suppose someone cut off an old bond, only to create another new bond.

<!-- @segment dn12:13.6 -->

That’s the consequence of such a wicked, greedy deed, I say. For what can one person do for another?’

<!-- @segment dn12:13.7 -->

Now, there are gentlemen who, relying on the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One, achieve a high distinction such as the following: they realize the fruit of stream-entry, the fruit of once-return, the fruit of non-return, or perfection. And in addition, there are those who ripen the seeds for rebirth in a heavenly state. The person who spoke like that makes it difficult for them. They’re acting unkindly, their heart is full of hostility, and they have wrong view.

<!-- @segment dn12:13.8 -->

An individual with wrong view is reborn in one of two places, I say:

<!-- @segment dn12:13.9 -->

hell or the animal realm.

<!-- @segment dn12:14.1 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:14.2 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:14.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:15.1 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:15.2 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:15.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:15.4 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:15.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:15.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:15.7 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:15.8 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:15.9 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:15.10 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:15.11 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:16.0 -->

2. Three Teachers Who Deserve to Be Reprimanded

<!-- @segment dn12:16.1 -->

Lohicca, there are three kinds of teachers in the world who deserve to be reprimanded.

<!-- @segment dn12:16.2 -->

When someone reprimands such teachers, the reprimand is true, correct, legitimate, and blameless.

<!-- @segment dn12:16.3 -->

What three?

<!-- @segment dn12:16.4 -->

Firstly, take a teacher who has not reached the goal of the ascetic life for which they went forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment dn12:16.5 -->

They teach their disciples:

<!-- @segment dn12:16.6 -->

‘This is for your welfare. This is for your happiness.’

<!-- @segment dn12:16.7 -->

But their disciples don’t want to listen. They don’t actively listen or try to understand. They proceed having turned away from the teacher’s instruction.

<!-- @segment dn12:16.8 -->

That teacher deserves to be reprimanded:

<!-- @segment dn12:16.9 -->

‘Venerable, you haven’t reached the goal of the ascetic life; and when you teach disciples

<!-- @segment dn12:16.10 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:16.11 -->

they proceed having turned away from the teacher’s instruction.

<!-- @segment dn12:16.12 -->

It’s like a man who makes advances on a woman though she pulls away, or embraces her though she turns her back.

<!-- @segment dn12:16.13 -->

That’s the consequence of such a wicked, greedy deed, I say. For what can one do for another?’

<!-- @segment dn12:16.14 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:16.15 -->

This is the first kind of teacher who deserves to be reprimanded.

<!-- @segment dn12:16.16 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:17.1 -->

Furthermore, take a teacher who has not reached the goal of the ascetic life for which they went forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment dn12:17.2 -->

They teach their disciples:

<!-- @segment dn12:17.3 -->

‘This is for your welfare. This is for your happiness.’

<!-- @segment dn12:17.4 -->

Their disciples do want to listen. They actively listen and try to understand. They don’t proceed having turned away from the teacher’s instruction.

<!-- @segment dn12:17.5 -->

That teacher deserves to be reprimanded:

<!-- @segment dn12:17.6 -->

‘Venerable, you haven’t reached the goal of the ascetic life; and when you teach disciples

<!-- @segment dn12:17.7 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:17.8 -->

they don’t proceed having turned away from the teacher’s instruction.

<!-- @segment dn12:17.9 -->

It’s like someone who abandons their own field and presumes to weed someone else’s field. That’s the consequence of such a wicked, greedy deed, I say. For what can one do for another?’

<!-- @segment dn12:17.10 -->

This is the second kind of teacher who deserves to be reprimanded.

<!-- @segment dn12:17.11 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:18.1 -->

Furthermore, take a teacher who has reached the goal of the ascetic life for which they went forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment dn12:18.2 -->

They teach their disciples:

<!-- @segment dn12:18.3 -->

‘This is for your welfare. This is for your happiness.’

<!-- @segment dn12:18.4 -->

But their disciples don’t want to listen. They don’t actively listen or try to understand. They proceed having turned away from the teacher’s instruction.

<!-- @segment dn12:18.5 -->

That teacher deserves to be reprimanded:

<!-- @segment dn12:18.6 -->

‘Venerable, you have reached the goal of the ascetic life; yet when you teach disciples

<!-- @segment dn12:18.7 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:18.8 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:18.9 -->

they proceed having turned away from the teacher’s instruction.

<!-- @segment dn12:18.10 -->

Suppose someone cut off an old bond, only to create another new bond.

<!-- @segment dn12:18.11 -->

That’s the consequence of such a wicked, greedy deed, I say. For what can one person do for another?’

<!-- @segment dn12:18.12 -->

This is the third kind of teacher who deserves to be reprimanded.

<!-- @segment dn12:18.13 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:18.14 -->

These are the three kinds of teachers in the world who deserve to be reprimanded.

<!-- @segment dn12:18.15 -->

When someone reprimands such teachers, the reprimand is true, correct, legitimate, and blameless.”

<!-- @segment dn12:19.0 -->

3. A Teacher Who Does Not Deserve to Be Reprimanded

<!-- @segment dn12:19.1 -->

When he had spoken, Lohicca said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment dn12:19.2 -->

“But worthy Gotama, is there a teacher in the world who does not deserve to be reprimanded?”

<!-- @segment dn12:19.3 -->

“There is, Lohicca.”

<!-- @segment dn12:19.4 -->

“But who is that teacher?”

<!-- @segment dn12:20-55.1 -->

“It’s when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully awakened Buddha …

<!-- @segment dn12:20-55.2 -->

That’s how a mendicant is accomplished in ethics. …

<!-- @segment dn12:20-55.3 -->

They enter and remain in the first absorption …

<!-- @segment dn12:20-55.4 -->

A teacher under whom a disciple achieves such a high distinction is one who does not deserve to be reprimanded.

<!-- @segment dn12:20-55.5 -->

When someone reprimands such a teacher, the reprimand is false, baseless, illegitimate, and blameworthy.

<!-- @segment dn12:56-62.1 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:56-62.2 -->

They enter and remain in the second absorption …

<!-- @segment dn12:56-62.3 -->

third absorption …

<!-- @segment dn12:56-62.4 -->

fourth absorption.

<!-- @segment dn12:56-62.5 -->

A teacher under whom a disciple achieves such a high distinction is one who does not deserve to be reprimanded. …

<!-- @segment dn12:63-77.1 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:63-77.2 -->

They project and extend the mind toward knowledge and vision …

<!-- @segment dn12:63-77.3 -->

A teacher under whom a disciple achieves such a high distinction is one who does not deserve to be reprimanded. …

<!-- @segment dn12:63-77.4 -->



<!-- @segment dn12:63-77.5 -->

They understand: ‘… there is nothing further for this place.’

<!-- @segment dn12:63-77.6 -->

A teacher under whom a disciple achieves such a high distinction is one who does not deserve to be reprimanded. When someone reprimands such a teacher, the reprimand is false, baseless, illegitimate, and blameworthy.”

<!-- @segment dn12:78.1 -->

When he had spoken, Lohicca said to the Buddha:

<!-- @segment dn12:78.2 -->

“Suppose, Mister Gotama, a person was falling over a cliff, and another person were to grab them by the hair, pull them up, and place them on solid ground.

<!-- @segment dn12:78.3 -->

In the same way, when I was falling off a cliff Mister Gotama pulled me up and placed me on solid ground.

<!-- @segment dn12:78.4 -->

Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent!

<!-- @segment dn12:78.5 -->

As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, worthy Gotama has made the Teaching clear in many ways.

<!-- @segment dn12:78.6 -->

I go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment dn12:78.7 -->

From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”
