---
slug: dn15
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Great Discourse on Causation
---

<!-- @segment dn15:1.0 -->

1. Dependent Origination

<!-- @segment dn15:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment dn15:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Kurus, near the Kuru town named Kammāsadamma.

<!-- @segment dn15:1.3 -->

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment dn15:1.4 -->

“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing,

<!-- @segment dn15:1.5 -->

in that this dependent origination is deep and appears deep, yet to me it seems as plain as can be.”

<!-- @segment dn15:1.6 -->

“Don’t say that, Ānanda, don’t say that!

<!-- @segment dn15:1.7 -->

This dependent origination is deep and appears deep.

<!-- @segment dn15:1.8 -->

It is because of not understanding and not penetrating this teaching that this population has become tangled like string, knotted like a ball of thread, and matted like rushes and reeds, and it doesn’t escape the places of loss, the bad places, the underworld, transmigration.

<!-- @segment dn15:2.1 -->

When asked, ‘Is there a specific condition for old age and death?’ you should answer, ‘There is.’

<!-- @segment dn15:2.2 -->

If they say, ‘What is a requirement for old age and death?’ you should answer, ‘Rebirth is a requirement for old age and death.’

<!-- @segment dn15:2.3 -->

When asked, ‘Is there a specific condition for rebirth?’ you should answer, ‘There is.’

<!-- @segment dn15:2.4 -->

If they say, ‘What is a requirement for rebirth?’ you should answer, ‘Continued existence is a requirement for rebirth.’

<!-- @segment dn15:2.5 -->

When asked, ‘Is there a specific condition for continued existence?’ you should answer, ‘There is.’

<!-- @segment dn15:2.6 -->

If they say, ‘What is a requirement for continued existence?’ you should answer, ‘Grasping is a requirement for continued existence.’

<!-- @segment dn15:2.7 -->

When asked, ‘Is there a specific condition for grasping?’ you should answer, ‘There is.’

<!-- @segment dn15:2.8 -->

If they say, ‘What is a requirement for grasping?’ you should answer, ‘Craving is a requirement for grasping.’

<!-- @segment dn15:2.9 -->

When asked, ‘Is there a specific condition for craving?’ you should answer, ‘There is.’

<!-- @segment dn15:2.10 -->

If they say, ‘What is a requirement for craving?’ you should answer, ‘Feeling is a requirement for craving.’

<!-- @segment dn15:2.11 -->

When asked, ‘Is there a specific condition for feeling?’ you should answer, ‘There is.’

<!-- @segment dn15:2.12 -->

If they say, ‘What is a requirement for feeling?’ you should answer, ‘Contact is a requirement for feeling.’

<!-- @segment dn15:2.13 -->

When asked, ‘Is there a specific condition for contact?’ you should answer, ‘There is.’

<!-- @segment dn15:2.14 -->

If they say, ‘What is a requirement for contact?’ you should answer, ‘Name and form are requirements for contact.’

<!-- @segment dn15:2.15 -->

When asked, ‘Is there a specific condition for name and form?’ you should answer, ‘There is.’

<!-- @segment dn15:2.16 -->

If they say, ‘What is a requirement for name and form?’ you should answer, ‘Consciousness is a requirement for name and form.’

<!-- @segment dn15:2.17 -->

When asked, ‘Is there a specific condition for consciousness?’ you should answer, ‘There is.’

<!-- @segment dn15:2.18 -->

If they say, ‘What is a requirement for consciousness?’ you should answer, ‘Name and form are requirements for consciousness.’

<!-- @segment dn15:3.1 -->

So: name and form are requirements for consciousness. Consciousness is a requirement for name and form. Name and form are requirements for contact. Contact is a requirement for feeling. Feeling is a requirement for craving. Craving is a requirement for grasping. Grasping is a requirement for continued existence. Continued existence is a requirement for rebirth. Rebirth is a requirement for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be.

<!-- @segment dn15:3.2 -->

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

<!-- @segment dn15:4.1 -->

‘Rebirth is a requirement for old age and death’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so.

<!-- @segment dn15:4.2 -->

Suppose there were totally and utterly no rebirth for anyone anywhere.

<!-- @segment dn15:4.3 -->

That is, there were no rebirth of sentient beings into their various realms—of gods, centaurs, spirits, creatures, humans, quadrupeds, birds, or reptiles, each into their own realm. When there’s no rebirth at all, with the cessation of rebirth, would old age and death still be found?”

<!-- @segment dn15:4.4 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:4.5 -->

“That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of old age and death, namely rebirth.

<!-- @segment dn15:5.1 -->

‘Continued existence is a requirement for rebirth’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so.

<!-- @segment dn15:5.2 -->

Suppose there were totally and utterly no continued existence for anyone anywhere.

<!-- @segment dn15:5.3 -->

That is, continued existence in the sensual realm, the realm of luminous form, or the formless realm. When there’s no continued existence at all, with the cessation of continued existence, would rebirth still be found?”

<!-- @segment dn15:5.4 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:5.5 -->

“That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of rebirth, namely continued existence.

<!-- @segment dn15:6.1 -->

‘Grasping is a requirement for continued existence’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so.

<!-- @segment dn15:6.2 -->

Suppose there were totally and utterly no grasping for anyone anywhere.

<!-- @segment dn15:6.3 -->

That is, grasping at sensual pleasures, views, precepts and observances, and theories of a self. When there’s no grasping at all, with the cessation of grasping, would continued existence still be found?”

<!-- @segment dn15:6.4 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:6.5 -->

“That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of continued existence, namely grasping.

<!-- @segment dn15:7.1 -->

‘Craving is a requirement for grasping’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so.

<!-- @segment dn15:7.2 -->

Suppose there were totally and utterly no craving for anyone anywhere.

<!-- @segment dn15:7.3 -->

That is, craving for sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. When there’s no craving at all, with the cessation of craving, would grasping still be found?”

<!-- @segment dn15:7.4 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:7.5 -->

“That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of grasping, namely craving.

<!-- @segment dn15:8.1 -->

‘Feeling is a requirement for craving’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so.

<!-- @segment dn15:8.2 -->

Suppose there were totally and utterly no feeling for anyone anywhere.

<!-- @segment dn15:8.3 -->

That is, feeling born of contact through the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. When there’s no feeling at all, with the cessation of feeling, would craving still be found?”

<!-- @segment dn15:8.4 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:8.5 -->

“That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of craving, namely feeling.

<!-- @segment dn15:9.1 -->

So it is, Ānanda, that feeling gives rise to craving. Craving gives rise to searching. Searching gives rise to gaining material things. Gaining material things gives rise to evaluation. Evaluation gives rise to desire and lust. Desire and lust gives rise to attachment. Attachment gives rise to ownership. Ownership gives rise to stinginess. Stinginess gives rise to safeguarding.

<!-- @segment dn15:9.2 -->

Owing to safeguarding, many bad, unskillful things come to be: taking up the rod and the sword, quarrels, arguments, and disputes, accusations, backbiting, and lies.

<!-- @segment dn15:10.1 -->

‘Owing to safeguarding, many bad, unskillful things come to be: taking up the rod and the sword, quarrels, arguments, and disputes, accusations, backbiting, and lies’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so.

<!-- @segment dn15:10.2 -->

Suppose there were totally and utterly no safeguarding for anyone anywhere. When there’s no safeguarding at all, with the cessation of safeguarding, would those many bad, unskillful things still come to be?”

<!-- @segment dn15:10.3 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:10.4 -->

“That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason for the origination of those many bad, unskillful things, namely safeguarding.

<!-- @segment dn15:11.1 -->

‘Stinginess gives rise to safeguarding’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so.

<!-- @segment dn15:11.2 -->

Suppose there were totally and utterly no stinginess for anyone anywhere. When there’s no stinginess at all, with the cessation of stinginess, would safeguarding still be found?”

<!-- @segment dn15:11.3 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:11.4 -->

“That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of safeguarding, namely stinginess.

<!-- @segment dn15:12.1 -->

‘Ownership gives rise to stinginess’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so.

<!-- @segment dn15:12.2 -->

Suppose there were totally and utterly no ownership for anyone anywhere. When there’s no ownership at all, with the cessation of ownership, would stinginess still be found?”

<!-- @segment dn15:12.3 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:12.4 -->

“That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of stinginess, namely ownership.

<!-- @segment dn15:13.1 -->

‘Attachment gives rise to ownership’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so.

<!-- @segment dn15:13.2 -->

Suppose there were totally and utterly no attachment for anyone anywhere. When there’s no attachment at all, with the cessation of attachment, would ownership still be found?”

<!-- @segment dn15:13.3 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:13.4 -->

“That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of ownership, namely attachment.

<!-- @segment dn15:14.1 -->

‘Desire and lust gives rise to attachment’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so.

<!-- @segment dn15:14.2 -->

Suppose there were totally and utterly no desire and lust for anyone anywhere. When there’s no desire and lust at all, with the cessation of desire and lust, would attachment still be found?”

<!-- @segment dn15:14.3 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:14.4 -->

“That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of attachment, namely desire and lust.

<!-- @segment dn15:15.1 -->

Evaluation gives rise to desire and lust’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so.

<!-- @segment dn15:15.2 -->

Suppose there were totally and utterly no evaluation for anyone anywhere. When there’s no evaluation at all, with the cessation of evaluation, would desire and lust still be found?”

<!-- @segment dn15:15.3 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:15.4 -->

“That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of desire and lust, namely evaluation.

<!-- @segment dn15:16.1 -->

‘Gaining material things gives rise to evaluation’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so.

<!-- @segment dn15:16.2 -->

Suppose there were totally and utterly no gaining of material things for anyone anywhere. When there’s no gaining of material things at all, with the cessation of gaining material things, would evaluation still be found?”

<!-- @segment dn15:16.3 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:16.4 -->

“That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of evaluation, namely the gaining of material things.

<!-- @segment dn15:17.1 -->

‘Searching gives rise to gaining material things’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so.

<!-- @segment dn15:17.2 -->

Suppose there were totally and utterly no searching for anyone anywhere. When there’s no searching at all, with the cessation of searching, would the gaining of material things still be found?”

<!-- @segment dn15:17.3 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:17.4 -->

“That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of gaining material things, namely searching.

<!-- @segment dn15:18.1 -->

‘Craving gives rise to searching’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so.

<!-- @segment dn15:18.2 -->

Suppose there were totally and utterly no craving for anyone anywhere.

<!-- @segment dn15:18.3 -->

That is, craving for sensual pleasures, craving for continued existence, and craving for nonexistence. When there’s no craving at all, with the cessation of craving, would searching still be found?”

<!-- @segment dn15:18.4 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:18.5 -->

“That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of searching, namely craving.

<!-- @segment dn15:18.6 -->

And so, Ānanda, these two things meet at the two aspects of feeling.

<!-- @segment dn15:19.1 -->

‘Contact is a requirement for feeling’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so.

<!-- @segment dn15:19.2 -->

Suppose there were totally and utterly no contact for anyone anywhere.

<!-- @segment dn15:19.3 -->

That is, contact through the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. When there’s no contact at all, with the cessation of contact, would feeling still be found?”

<!-- @segment dn15:19.4 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:19.5 -->

“That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of feeling, namely contact.

<!-- @segment dn15:20.1 -->

‘Name and form are requirements for contact’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so.

<!-- @segment dn15:20.2 -->

Suppose there were none of the features, attributes, signs, and details by which the set of mental phenomena known as name is found. Would labeling contact still be found in the set of physical phenomena?”

<!-- @segment dn15:20.3 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:20.4 -->

“Suppose there were none of the features, attributes, signs, and details by which the set of physical phenomena known as form is found. Would impingement contact still be found in the set of mental phenomena?”

<!-- @segment dn15:20.5 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:20.6 -->

“Suppose there were none of the features, attributes, signs, and details by which the set of phenomena known as name and the set of phenomena known as form are found. Would either labeling contact or impingement contact still be found?”

<!-- @segment dn15:20.7 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:20.8 -->

“Suppose there were none of the features, attributes, signs, and details by which name and form are found. Would contact still be found?”

<!-- @segment dn15:20.9 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:20.10 -->

“That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of contact, namely name and form.

<!-- @segment dn15:21.1 -->

‘Consciousness is a requirement for name and form’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so.

<!-- @segment dn15:21.2 -->

If consciousness were not conceived in the mother’s womb, would name and form coagulate there?”

<!-- @segment dn15:21.3 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:21.4 -->

“If consciousness, after being conceived in the mother’s womb, were to be miscarried, would name and form be born into this place?”

<!-- @segment dn15:21.5 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:21.6 -->

“If the consciousness of a young boy or girl were to be cut off, would name and form achieve growth, increase, and maturity?”

<!-- @segment dn15:21.7 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:21.8 -->

“That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of name and form, namely consciousness.

<!-- @segment dn15:22.1 -->

‘Name and form are requirements for consciousness’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so.

<!-- @segment dn15:22.2 -->

If consciousness were not established in name and form, would the coming to be of the origin of suffering—of rebirth, old age, and death in the future—be found?”

<!-- @segment dn15:22.3 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:22.4 -->

“That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of consciousness, namely name and form.

<!-- @segment dn15:22.5 -->

This is the extent to which one may be reborn, grow old, die, pass away, or reappear.

<!-- @segment dn15:22.6 -->

This is how far the scope of labeling, definition, and description extends; how far the sphere of wisdom extends; how far the cycle of rebirths spins so that this state of being may be found; namely, name and form together with consciousness.

<!-- @segment dn15:23.0 -->

2. Describing the Self

<!-- @segment dn15:23.1 -->

How do those who describe the self describe it?

<!-- @segment dn15:23.2 -->

They describe it as formed and limited:

<!-- @segment dn15:23.3 -->

‘My self is formed and limited.’

<!-- @segment dn15:23.4 -->

Or they describe it as formed and infinite:

<!-- @segment dn15:23.5 -->

‘My self is formed and infinite.’

<!-- @segment dn15:23.6 -->

Or they describe it as formless and limited:

<!-- @segment dn15:23.7 -->

‘My self is formless and limited.’

<!-- @segment dn15:23.8 -->

Or they describe it as formless and infinite:

<!-- @segment dn15:23.9 -->

‘My self is formless and infinite.’

<!-- @segment dn15:24.1 -->

Now, take those who describe the self as formed and limited.

<!-- @segment dn15:24.2 -->

They describe the self in the present as formed and limited; or they describe it as sure to be in some other place formed and limited; or else they think: ‘Though it is not like that, I will ensure it is provided with what it needs to become like that.’

<!-- @segment dn15:24.3 -->

This being so, it’s appropriate to say that a theory of self as formed and limited underlies them.

<!-- @segment dn15:24.4 -->

Now, take those who describe the self as formed and infinite …

<!-- @segment dn15:24.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn15:24.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn15:24.7 -->

formless and limited …

<!-- @segment dn15:24.8 -->



<!-- @segment dn15:24.9 -->



<!-- @segment dn15:24.10 -->

formless and infinite.

<!-- @segment dn15:24.11 -->

They describe the self as formless and infinite in the present; or as sure to become formless and infinite in some other place; or else they think: ‘Though it is not like that, I will ensure it is provided with what it needs to become like that.’

<!-- @segment dn15:24.12 -->

This being so, it’s appropriate to say that a theory of self as formless and infinite underlies them.

<!-- @segment dn15:24.13 -->

That’s how those who describe the self describe it.

<!-- @segment dn15:25.0 -->

3. Not Describing the Self

<!-- @segment dn15:25.1 -->

How do those who don’t describe the self not describe it?

<!-- @segment dn15:25.2 -->

They don’t describe it as formed and limited …

<!-- @segment dn15:25.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn15:25.4 -->

formed and infinite …

<!-- @segment dn15:25.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn15:25.6 -->

formless and limited …

<!-- @segment dn15:25.7 -->



<!-- @segment dn15:25.8 -->

formless and infinite:

<!-- @segment dn15:25.9 -->

‘My self is formless and infinite.’

<!-- @segment dn15:26.1 -->

Now, take those who don’t describe the self as formed and limited …

<!-- @segment dn15:26.2 -->



<!-- @segment dn15:26.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn15:26.4 -->

formed and infinite …

<!-- @segment dn15:26.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn15:26.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn15:26.7 -->

formless and limited …

<!-- @segment dn15:26.8 -->



<!-- @segment dn15:26.9 -->



<!-- @segment dn15:26.10 -->

formless and infinite.

<!-- @segment dn15:26.11 -->

They don’t describe the self in the present as formless and infinite; or as sure to become in some other place formless and infinite; and they don’t think: ‘Though it is not like that, I will ensure it is provided with what it needs to become like that.’

<!-- @segment dn15:26.12 -->

This being so, it’s appropriate to say that a theory of self as formless and infinite doesn’t underlie them.

<!-- @segment dn15:26.13 -->

That’s how those who don’t describe the self don’t describe it.

<!-- @segment dn15:27.0 -->

4. Regarding a Self

<!-- @segment dn15:27.1 -->

How do those who regard the self regard it?

<!-- @segment dn15:27.2 -->

They regard feeling as self:

<!-- @segment dn15:27.3 -->

‘Feeling is my self.’

<!-- @segment dn15:27.4 -->

Or they regard it like this: ‘Feeling is definitely not my self. My self does not experience feeling.’

<!-- @segment dn15:27.5 -->

Or they regard it like this: ‘Feeling is definitely not my self. But it’s not that my self does not experience feeling. My self feels, for my self is liable to feel.’

<!-- @segment dn15:28.1 -->

Now, as to those who say:

<!-- @segment dn15:28.2 -->

‘Feeling is my self.’

<!-- @segment dn15:28.3 -->

You should say this to them:

<!-- @segment dn15:28.4 -->

‘Reverend, there are three feelings:

<!-- @segment dn15:28.5 -->

pleasant, painful, and neutral.

<!-- @segment dn15:28.6 -->

Which one of these do you regard as self?’

<!-- @segment dn15:28.7 -->

Ānanda, at a time when you feel a pleasant feeling, you don’t feel a painful or neutral feeling;

<!-- @segment dn15:28.8 -->

you only feel a pleasant feeling.

<!-- @segment dn15:28.9 -->

At a time when you feel a painful feeling, you don’t feel a pleasant or neutral feeling;

<!-- @segment dn15:28.10 -->

you only feel a painful feeling.

<!-- @segment dn15:28.11 -->

At a time when you feel a neutral feeling, you don’t feel a pleasant or painful feeling;

<!-- @segment dn15:28.12 -->

you only feel a neutral feeling.

<!-- @segment dn15:29.1 -->

Pleasant feelings, painful feelings, and neutral feelings are all impermanent, conditioned, dependently originated, liable to end, vanish, fade away, and cease.

<!-- @segment dn15:29.2 -->



<!-- @segment dn15:29.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn15:29.4 -->

When feeling a pleasant feeling they think: ‘This is my self.’

<!-- @segment dn15:29.5 -->

When their pleasant feeling ceases they think: ‘My self has expired.’

<!-- @segment dn15:29.6 -->

When feeling a painful feeling they think: ‘This is my self.’

<!-- @segment dn15:29.7 -->

When their painful feeling ceases they think: ‘My self has expired.’

<!-- @segment dn15:29.8 -->

When feeling a neutral feeling they think: ‘This is my self.’

<!-- @segment dn15:29.9 -->

When their neutral feeling ceases they think: ‘My self has expired.’

<!-- @segment dn15:29.10 -->

So those who say ‘feeling is my self’ regard as self that which is evidently impermanent, mixed with pleasure and pain, and liable to rise and fall.

<!-- @segment dn15:29.11 -->

That’s why it’s not acceptable to regard feeling as self.

<!-- @segment dn15:30.1 -->

Now, as to those who say:

<!-- @segment dn15:30.2 -->

‘Feeling is definitely not my self. My self does not experience feeling.’ You should say this to them,

<!-- @segment dn15:30.3 -->

‘But reverend, where there is nothing felt at all, would the thought “I am” occur there?’”

<!-- @segment dn15:30.4 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:30.5 -->

“That’s why it’s not acceptable to regard self as that which does not experience feeling.

<!-- @segment dn15:31.1 -->

Now, as to those who say:

<!-- @segment dn15:31.2 -->

‘Feeling is definitely not my self. But it’s not that my self does not experience feeling. My self feels, for my self is liable to feel.’

<!-- @segment dn15:31.3 -->

You should say this to them,

<!-- @segment dn15:31.4 -->

‘Suppose feelings were to totally and utterly cease without remainder.

<!-- @segment dn15:31.5 -->

When there’s no feeling at all, with the cessation of feeling, would the thought “I am this” occur there?’”

<!-- @segment dn15:31.6 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:31.7 -->

“That’s why it’s not acceptable to regard self as that which is liable to feel.

<!-- @segment dn15:32.1 -->



<!-- @segment dn15:32.2 -->

Not regarding anything in this way, they don’t grasp at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment dn15:32.3 -->

Not grasping, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished.

<!-- @segment dn15:32.4 -->

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’

<!-- @segment dn15:32.5 -->

It wouldn’t be appropriate to say that a mendicant whose mind is freed like this holds the following views:

<!-- @segment dn15:32.6 -->

‘A realized one still exists after death’;

<!-- @segment dn15:32.7 -->

‘A realized one no longer exists after death’;

<!-- @segment dn15:32.8 -->

‘A realized one both still exists and no longer exists after death’;

<!-- @segment dn15:32.9 -->

‘A realized one neither still exists nor no longer exists after death’.

<!-- @segment dn15:32.10 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment dn15:32.11 -->

A mendicant is freed by directly knowing this: how far labeling and the scope of labeling extend; how far definition and the scope of definition extend; how far description and the scope of description extend; how far wisdom and the sphere of wisdom extend; how far the cycle of rebirths and its continuation extend. It wouldn’t be appropriate to say that a mendicant freed by directly knowing this holds the view: ‘There is no such thing as knowing and seeing.’

<!-- @segment dn15:33.0 -->

5. Planes of Consciousness

<!-- @segment dn15:33.1 -->

Ānanda, there are seven planes of consciousness and two dimensions.

<!-- @segment dn15:33.2 -->

What seven?

<!-- @segment dn15:33.3 -->

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and diverse in perception, such as human beings, some gods, and some beings in the underworld.

<!-- @segment dn15:33.4 -->

This is the first plane of consciousness.

<!-- @segment dn15:33.5 -->

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and unified in perception, such as the gods reborn in the Divinity’s host through the first absorption.

<!-- @segment dn15:33.6 -->

This is the second plane of consciousness.

<!-- @segment dn15:33.7 -->

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and diverse in perception, such as the gods of streaming radiance.

<!-- @segment dn15:33.8 -->

This is the third plane of consciousness.

<!-- @segment dn15:33.9 -->

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and unified in perception, such as the gods of universal beauty.

<!-- @segment dn15:33.10 -->

This is the fourth plane of consciousness.

<!-- @segment dn15:33.11 -->

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond perceptions of form. With the disappearance of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, they have been reborn in the dimension of infinite space.

<!-- @segment dn15:33.12 -->

This is the fifth plane of consciousness.

<!-- @segment dn15:33.13 -->

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of infinite space. Aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, they have been reborn in the dimension of infinite consciousness.

<!-- @segment dn15:33.14 -->

This is the sixth plane of consciousness.

<!-- @segment dn15:33.15 -->

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness. Aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, they have been reborn in the dimension of nothingness.

<!-- @segment dn15:33.16 -->

This is the seventh plane of consciousness.

<!-- @segment dn15:33.17 -->

Then there is the dimension of non-percipient beings, and secondly, the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception.

<!-- @segment dn15:34.1 -->

Now, regarding these seven planes of consciousness and two dimensions,

<!-- @segment dn15:34.2 -->

is it appropriate for someone who understands them—and their origin, disappearance, gratification, drawback, and escape—to take pleasure in them?”

<!-- @segment dn15:34.3 -->

“No, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn15:34.4 -->



<!-- @segment dn15:34.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn15:34.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn15:34.7 -->



<!-- @segment dn15:34.8 -->



<!-- @segment dn15:34.9 -->



<!-- @segment dn15:34.10 -->

“When a mendicant, having truly understood the origin, disappearance, gratification, drawback, and escape regarding these seven planes of consciousness and these two dimensions, is freed by not grasping, they’re called a mendicant who is freed by wisdom.

<!-- @segment dn15:35.0 -->

6. The Eight Liberations

<!-- @segment dn15:35.1 -->

Ānanda, there are these eight liberations.

<!-- @segment dn15:35.2 -->

What eight?

<!-- @segment dn15:35.3 -->

Having physical form, they see forms.

<!-- @segment dn15:35.4 -->

This is the first liberation.

<!-- @segment dn15:35.5 -->

Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally.

<!-- @segment dn15:35.6 -->

This is the second liberation.

<!-- @segment dn15:35.7 -->

They’re focused only on beauty.

<!-- @segment dn15:35.8 -->

This is the third liberation.

<!-- @segment dn15:35.9 -->

Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite space.

<!-- @segment dn15:35.10 -->

This is the fourth liberation.

<!-- @segment dn15:35.11 -->

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness.

<!-- @segment dn15:35.12 -->

This is the fifth liberation.

<!-- @segment dn15:35.13 -->

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, they enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness.

<!-- @segment dn15:35.14 -->

This is the sixth liberation.

<!-- @segment dn15:35.15 -->

Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception.

<!-- @segment dn15:35.16 -->

This is the seventh liberation.

<!-- @segment dn15:35.17 -->

Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and feeling.

<!-- @segment dn15:35.18 -->

This is the eighth liberation.

<!-- @segment dn15:35.19 -->

These are the eight liberations.

<!-- @segment dn15:36.1 -->

When a mendicant enters into and withdraws from these eight liberations—in forward order, in reverse order, and in forward and reverse order—wherever they wish, whenever they wish, and for as long as they wish;

<!-- @segment dn15:36.2 -->

and when they realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements, they’re called a mendicant who is freed both ways.

<!-- @segment dn15:36.3 -->

And, Ānanda, there is no other freedom both ways that is better or finer than this.”

<!-- @segment dn15:36.4 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment dn15:36.5 -->

Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what the Buddha said.
