---
slug: dn17
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: King Mahāsudassana
---

<!-- @segment dn17:1.1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying between a pair of sal trees in the sal forest of the Mallas at Upavattana near Kusinārā at the time of his full extinguishment.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.2.1 -->

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.2.2 -->

“Sir, please don’t be fully extinguished in this little hamlet, this jungle hamlet, this branch hamlet.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.2.3 -->

There are other great cities such as

<!-- @segment dn17:1.2.4 -->

Campā, Rājagaha, Sāvatthī, Sāketa, Kosambī, and Varanasi.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.2.5 -->

Let the Buddha be fully extinguished there.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.2.6 -->

There are many well-to-do aristocrats, brahmins, and householders there who are devoted to the Buddha. They will perform the rites of venerating the Realized One’s corpse.”

<!-- @segment dn17:1.3.1 -->

“Don’t say that, Ānanda! Don’t say that

<!-- @segment dn17:1.3.2 -->

this is a little hamlet, a jungle hamlet, a branch hamlet.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.3.3.0 -->

1. The Capital City of Kusāvatī

<!-- @segment dn17:1.3.4 -->

Once upon a time there was a king named Mahāsudassana whose dominion extended to all four sides, and who achieved stability in the country.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.3.5 -->

His capital was this Kusinārā, which at the time was named Kusāvatī.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.3.6 -->

It stretched for twelve leagues from east to west, and seven leagues from north to south.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.3.7 -->

The royal capital of Kusāvatī was successful, prosperous, populous, full of people, with plenty of food.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.3.8 -->

It was just like Āḷakamandā, the royal capital of the gods, which is successful, prosperous, populous, full of spirits, with plenty of food.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.3.9 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:1.3.10 -->

Kusāvatī was never free of ten sounds by day or night, namely:

<!-- @segment dn17:1.3.11 -->

the sound of elephants, horses, chariots, drums, clay drums, arched harps, singing, horns, gongs, and handbells; and the cry, ‘Eat, drink, be merry!’ as the tenth.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.4.1 -->

Kusāvatī was encircled by seven ramparts:

<!-- @segment dn17:1.4.2 -->

one made of gold, one made of silver, one made of beryl, one made of crystal, one made of ruby, one made of emerald, and one made of all precious things.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.5.1 -->

It had four gates,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.5.2 -->

made of gold, silver, beryl, and crystal.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.5.3 -->

At each gate there were seven pillars, three fathoms deep and four fathoms high,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.5.4 -->

made of gold, silver, beryl, crystal, ruby, emerald, and all precious things.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.6.1 -->

It was surrounded by seven rows of palm trees,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.6.2 -->

made of gold, silver, beryl, crystal, ruby, emerald, and all precious things.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.6.3 -->

The golden palms had trunks of gold, and leaves and fruits of silver.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.6.4 -->

The silver palms had trunks of silver, and leaves and fruits of gold.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.6.5 -->

The beryl palms had trunks of beryl, and leaves and fruits of crystal.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.6.6 -->

The crystal palms had trunks of crystal, and leaves and fruits of beryl.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.6.7 -->

The ruby palms had trunks of ruby, and leaves and fruits of emerald.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.6.8 -->

The emerald palms had trunks of emerald, and leaves and fruits of ruby.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.6.9 -->

The palms of all precious things had trunks of all precious things, and leaves and fruits of all precious things.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.6.10 -->

When those rows of palm trees were blown by the wind they sounded graceful, tantalizing, sensuous, lovely, and intoxicating,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.6.11 -->

like a quintet made up of skilled musicians who had practiced well and kept excellent rhythm.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.6.12 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:1.6.13 -->

And any addicts, carousers, or drunkards in Kusāvatī at that time were entertained by that sound.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.7.0.1 -->

2. The Seven Treasures

<!-- @segment dn17:1.7.0.2 -->

2.1. The Wheel-Treasure

<!-- @segment dn17:1.7.1 -->

King Mahāsudassana possessed seven treasures and four blessings.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.7.2 -->

What seven?

<!-- @segment dn17:1.7.3 -->

On a fifteenth day sabbath, King Mahāsudassana had bathed his head and gone upstairs in the royal longhouse to observe the sabbath.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.7.4 -->

And the heavenly wheel-treasure appeared to him, with a thousand spokes, with rim and hub, complete in every detail.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.7.5 -->

Seeing this, the king thought,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.7.6 -->

‘I have heard that when the heavenly wheel-treasure appears to a king in this way, he becomes a wheel-turning monarch.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.7.7 -->

Am I then a wheel-turning monarch?’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.8.1 -->

Then King Mahāsudassana, rising from his seat and arranging his robe over one shoulder, took a ceremonial vase in his left hand and besprinkled the wheel-treasure with his right hand, saying:

<!-- @segment dn17:1.8.2 -->

‘Roll forth, O wheel-treasure! Triumph, O wheel-treasure!’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.8.3 -->

Then the wheel-treasure rolled towards the east. And the king followed it together with his army of four divisions. In whatever place the wheel-treasure stood still, there the king came to stay together with his army.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.9.1 -->

And any opposing rulers of the eastern quarter came to him and said,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.9.2 -->

‘Come, great king! Welcome, great king! We are yours, great king, instruct us.’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.9.3 -->

The king said,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.9.4 -->

‘Do not kill living creatures. Do not steal. Do not commit sexual misconduct. Do not lie. Do not drink liquor. Maintain the current level of taxation.’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.9.5 -->

And so the opposing rulers of the eastern quarter became his vassals.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.10.1 -->

Then the wheel-treasure, having plunged into the eastern ocean and emerged again, rolled towards the south. …

<!-- @segment dn17:1.10.2 -->

Having plunged into the southern ocean and emerged again, it rolled towards the west. …

<!-- @segment dn17:1.10.3 -->

Having plunged into the western ocean and emerged again, it rolled towards the north, followed by the king together with his army of four divisions.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.10.4 -->

In whatever place the wheel-treasure stood still, there the king came to stay together with his army.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.10.5 -->

And any opposing rulers of the northern quarter came to him and said,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.10.6 -->

‘Come, great king! Welcome, great king! We are yours, great king, instruct us.’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.10.7 -->

The king said,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.10.8 -->

‘Do not kill living creatures. Do not steal. Do not commit sexual misconduct. Do not lie. Do not drink liquor. Maintain the current level of taxation.’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.10.9 -->

And so the opposing rulers of the northern quarter became his vassals.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.11.1 -->

And then the wheel-treasure, having triumphed over this land surrounded by ocean, returned to the royal capital. There it stood still by the gate to the royal compound at the High Court as if fixed to an axle, illuminating the royal compound.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.11.2 -->

Such is the wheel-treasure that appeared to King Mahāsudassana.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.12.0 -->

2.2. The Elephant-Treasure

<!-- @segment dn17:1.12.1 -->

Next, the elephant-treasure appeared to King Mahāsudassana.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.12.2 -->

It was an all-white sky-walker with psychic power, touching the ground in seven places, a king of elephants named Sabbath.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.12.3 -->

Seeing him, the king was impressed,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.12.4 -->

‘This would truly be a fine elephant vehicle, if he would submit to taming.’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.12.5 -->

Then the elephant-treasure submitted to taming, as if he was a fine thoroughbred elephant that had been tamed for a long time.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.12.6 -->

Once it so happened that King Mahāsudassana, testing that same elephant-treasure, mounted him in the morning and traversed the land surrounded by ocean before returning to the royal capital in time for breakfast.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.12.7 -->

Such is the elephant-treasure that appeared to King Mahāsudassana.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.13.0 -->

2.3. The Horse-Treasure

<!-- @segment dn17:1.13.1 -->

Next, the horse-treasure appeared to King Mahāsudassana.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.13.2 -->

It was an all-white sky-walker with psychic power, with head of black and mane like woven reeds, a royal steed named Thundercloud.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.13.3 -->

Seeing him, the king was impressed,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.13.4 -->

‘This would truly be a fine horse vehicle, if he would submit to taming.’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.13.5 -->

Then the horse-treasure submitted to taming, as if he was a fine thoroughbred horse that had been tamed for a long time.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.13.6 -->

Once it so happened that King Mahāsudassana, testing that same horse-treasure, mounted him in the morning and traversed the land surrounded by ocean before returning to the royal capital in time for breakfast.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.13.7 -->

Such is the horse-treasure that appeared to King Mahāsudassana.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.14.0 -->

2.4. The Jewel-Treasure

<!-- @segment dn17:1.14.1 -->

Next, the jewel-treasure appeared to King Mahāsudassana.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.14.2 -->

It was a beryl gem that was naturally lustrous, eight-faceted, well-worked, transparent, clear, and unclouded, endowed with all good qualities.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.14.3 -->

And the radiance of that jewel spread all-round for a league.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.14.4 -->

Once it so happened that King Mahāsudassana, testing that same jewel-treasure, mobilized his army of four divisions and, with the jewel hoisted on his banner, set out in the dark of the night.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.14.5 -->

Then the villagers around them set off to work, thinking that it was day.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.14.6 -->

Such is the jewel-treasure that appeared to King Mahāsudassana.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.15.0 -->

2.5. The Woman-Treasure

<!-- @segment dn17:1.15.1 -->

Next, the woman-treasure appeared to King Mahāsudassana.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.15.2 -->

She was attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty. She was neither too tall nor too short; neither too thin nor too fat; neither too dark nor too light. She outdid human beauty without reaching heavenly beauty.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.15.3 -->

And her touch was like a tuft of cotton-wool or kapok.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.15.4 -->

When it was cool her limbs were warm, and when it was warm her limbs were cool.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.15.5 -->

The fragrance of sandal floated from her body, and lotus from her mouth.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.15.6 -->

She got up before the king and went to bed after him, and was obliging, behaving nicely and speaking politely.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.15.7 -->

The woman-treasure did not betray the wheel-turning monarch even in thought, still less in deed.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.15.8 -->

Such is the woman-treasure that appeared to King Mahāsudassana.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.16.0 -->

2.6. The Householder-Treasure

<!-- @segment dn17:1.16.1 -->

Next, the householder-treasure appeared to King Mahāsudassana.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.16.2 -->

The power of clairvoyance manifested in him as a result of past deeds, by which he sees treasure troves, both owned and ownerless.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.16.3 -->

He approached the king and said,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.16.4 -->

‘Relax, sire. I will take care of the treasury.’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.16.5 -->

Once it so happened that the wheel-turning monarch, testing that same householder-treasure, boarded a boat and sailed to the middle of the Ganges river. Then he said to the householder-treasure,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.16.6 -->

‘Householder, I need gold, both coined and uncoined.’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.16.7 -->

‘Well then, great king, draw the boat up to one shore.’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.16.8 -->

‘It’s right here, householder, that I need gold, both coined and uncoined.’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.16.9 -->

Then that householder-treasure, immersing both hands in the water, pulled up a pot full of gold, both coined and uncoined, and said to the king,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.16.10 -->

‘Is this sufficient, great king? Has enough been done, great king, enough offered?’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.16.11 -->

The king said,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.16.12 -->

‘That is sufficient, householder. Enough has been done, enough offered.’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.16.13 -->

Such is the householder-treasure that appeared to King Mahāsudassana.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.17.0 -->

2.7. The Commander-Treasure

<!-- @segment dn17:1.18.1 -->

Next, the commander-treasure appeared to King Mahāsudassana.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.18.2 -->

He is astute, competent, intelligent, and capable regarding who should be ushered in to the king’s presence, who should be ushered out, and who should be kept by his side.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.18.3 -->

He approached the king and said,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.18.4 -->

‘Relax, sire. I shall issue instructions.’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.18.5 -->

Such is the commander-treasure that appeared to King Mahāsudassana.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.18.6 -->

These are the seven treasures possessed by King Mahāsudassana.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.18.7.0 -->

3. The Four Blessings

<!-- @segment dn17:1.18.8 -->

King Mahāsudassana possessed four blessings.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.18.9 -->

And what are the four blessings?

<!-- @segment dn17:1.18.10 -->

He was attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty, more so than other humans.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.18.11 -->

This is the first blessing.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.19.1 -->

Furthermore, he was long-lived, more so than other humans.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.19.2 -->

This is the second blessing.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.20.1 -->

Furthermore, he was rarely ill or unwell, and his stomach digested well, being neither too hot nor too cold, more so than other humans.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.20.2 -->

This is the third blessing.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.21.1 -->

Furthermore, he was as dear and beloved to the brahmins and householders

<!-- @segment dn17:1.21.2 -->

as a father is to his children.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.21.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:1.21.4 -->

And the brahmins and householders were as dear to the king

<!-- @segment dn17:1.21.5 -->

as children are to their father.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.21.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:1.21.7 -->

Once it so happened that King Mahāsudassana went with his army of four divisions to visit a park.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.21.8 -->

Then the brahmins and householders went up to him and said,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.21.9 -->

‘Slow down, Your Majesty, so we may see you longer!’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.21.10 -->

And the king addressed his charioteer,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.21.11 -->

‘Drive slowly, charioteer, so I can see the brahmins and householders longer!’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.21.12 -->

This is the fourth blessing.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.21.13 -->

These are the four blessings possessed by King Mahāsudassana.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.22.0 -->

4. Lotus Ponds in the Palace of Principle

<!-- @segment dn17:1.22.1 -->

Then King Mahāsudassana thought,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.22.2 -->

‘Why don’t I have lotus ponds built between the palms, at intervals of a hundred bow lengths?’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.22.3 -->

So that’s what he did.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.22.4 -->

The lotus ponds were lined with tiles of four colors,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.22.5 -->

made of gold, silver, beryl, and crystal.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.22.6 -->

And four flights of stairs of four colors descended into each lotus pond,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.22.7 -->

made of gold, silver, beryl, and crystal.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.22.8 -->

The golden stairs had posts of gold, and banisters and finials of silver.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.22.9 -->

The silver stairs had posts of silver, and banisters and finials of gold.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.22.10 -->

The beryl stairs had posts of beryl, and banisters and finials of crystal.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.22.11 -->

The crystal stairs had posts of crystal, and banisters and finials of beryl.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.22.12 -->

Those lotus ponds were surrounded by two balustrades, made of gold and silver.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.22.13 -->

The golden balustrades had posts of gold, and banisters and finials of silver.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.22.14 -->

The silver balustrades had posts of silver, and banisters and finials of gold.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.23.1 -->

Then King Mahāsudassana thought,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.23.2 -->

‘Why don’t I plant flowers in the lotus ponds such as blue water lilies, and lotuses of pink, yellow, and white, blooming all year round, and accessible to the public?’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.23.3 -->

So that’s what he did.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.23.4 -->

Then King Mahāsudassana thought,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.23.5 -->

‘Why don’t I appoint bath attendants to help bathe the people who come to bathe in the lotus ponds?’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.23.6 -->

So that’s what he did.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.23.7 -->

Then King Mahāsudassana thought,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.23.8 -->

‘Why don’t I set up charities on the banks of the lotus ponds,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.23.9 -->

so that those in need of food, drink, clothes, vehicles, beds, women, coined gold, or uncoined gold can get what they need?’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.23.10 -->

So that’s what he did.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.23.11 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:1.24.1 -->

Then the brahmins and householders came to the king bringing abundant wealth and said,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.24.2 -->

‘Sire, this abundant wealth is specially for you alone; may Your Highness accept it!’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.24.3 -->

‘There’s enough raised for me through regular taxes. Let this be for you; and here, take even more!’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.24.4 -->

When the king turned them down, they withdrew to one side to think up a plan,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.24.5 -->

‘It wouldn’t be proper for us to take this abundant wealth back to our own homes.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.24.6 -->

Why don’t we build a home for King Mahāsudassana?’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.24.7 -->

They went up to the king and said,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.24.8 -->

‘We shall have a home built for you, sire!’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.24.9 -->

King Mahāsudassana consented with silence.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.25.1 -->

And then Sakka, lord of gods, knowing the king’s train of thought, addressed the godling Vissakamma,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.25.2 -->

‘Come, dear Vissakamma, build a palace named Principle as a home for King Mahāsudassana.’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.25.3 -->

‘Yes, lord,’ replied Vissakamma. Then, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from the gods of the thirty-three and appeared in front of King Mahāsudassana.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.25.4 -->

Vissakamma said to the king,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.25.5 -->

‘I shall build a palace named Principle as a home for you, sire.’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.25.6 -->

King Mahāsudassana consented with silence.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.25.7 -->

And so that’s what Vissakamma did.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.25.8 -->

The Palace of Principle stretched for a league from east to west, and half a league from north to south.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.25.9 -->

It was lined with tiles of four colors, three fathoms high,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.25.10 -->

made of gold, silver, beryl, and crystal.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.26.1 -->

It had 84,000 pillars of four colors,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.26.2 -->

made of gold, silver, beryl, and crystal.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.26.3 -->

It was covered with panels of four colors,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.26.4 -->

made of gold, silver, beryl, and crystal.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.26.5 -->

It had twenty-four staircases of four colors,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.26.6 -->

made of gold, silver, beryl, and crystal.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.26.7 -->

The golden stairs had posts of gold, and banisters and finials of silver.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.26.8 -->

The silver stairs had posts of silver, and banisters and finials of gold.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.26.9 -->

The beryl stairs had posts of beryl, and banisters and finials of crystal.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.26.10 -->

The crystal stairs had posts of crystal, and banisters and finials of beryl.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.26.11 -->

It had 84,000 chambers of four colors,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.26.12 -->

made of gold, silver, beryl, and crystal.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.26.13 -->

In each chamber a couch was spread: in the golden chamber a couch of silver; in the silver chamber a couch of gold; in the beryl chamber a couch of ivory; in the crystal chamber a couch of hardwood.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.26.14 -->

At the door of the golden chamber stood a palm tree of silver, with trunk of silver, and leaves and fruits of gold.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.26.15 -->

At the door of the silver chamber stood a palm tree of gold, with trunk of gold, and leaves and fruits of silver.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.26.16 -->

At the door of the beryl chamber stood a palm tree of crystal, with trunk of crystal, and leaves and fruits of beryl.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.26.17 -->

At the door of the crystal chamber stood a palm tree of beryl, with trunk of beryl, and leaves and fruits of crystal.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.27.1 -->

Then King Mahāsudassana thought,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.27.2 -->

‘Why don’t I build a grove of golden palm trees at the door to the Chamber of the Grand Tower, where I can sit for the day?’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.27.3 -->

So that’s what he did.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.28.1 -->

The Palace of Principle was surrounded by two balustrades, made of gold and silver.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.28.2 -->

The golden balustrades had posts of gold, and banisters and finials of silver.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.28.3 -->

The silver balustrades had posts of silver, and banisters and finials of gold.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.29.1 -->

The Palace of Principle was surrounded by two nets of bells,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.29.2 -->

made of gold and silver.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.29.3 -->

The golden net had bells of silver, and the silver net had bells of gold.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.29.4 -->

When those nets of bells were blown by the wind they sounded graceful, tantalizing, sensuous, lovely, and intoxicating,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.29.5 -->

like a quintet made up of skilled musicians who had practiced well and kept excellent rhythm.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.29.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:1.29.7 -->

And any addicts, carousers, or drunkards in Kusāvatī at that time were entertained by that sound.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.29.8 -->

When it was finished, the palace was hard to look at, dazzling to the eyes.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.29.9 -->

It was like how in the last month of the rainy season, in autumn, when the heavens are sunny and cloudless, as the sun is rising to the firmament, it is hard to look at, dazzling to the eyes.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.29.10 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:1.30.1 -->

Then King Mahāsudassana thought,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.30.2 -->

‘Why don’t I build a lotus pond named Principle in front of the palace?’

<!-- @segment dn17:1.30.3 -->

So that’s what he did.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.30.4 -->

The Lotus Pond of Principle stretched for a league from east to west, and half a league from north to south.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.30.5 -->

It was lined with tiles of four colors,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.30.6 -->

made of gold, silver, beryl, and crystal.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.31.1 -->

It had twenty-four staircases of four colors,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.31.2 -->

made of gold, silver, beryl, and crystal.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.31.3 -->

The golden stairs had posts of gold, and banisters and finials of silver.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.31.4 -->

The silver stairs had posts of silver, and banisters and finials of gold.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.31.5 -->

The beryl stairs had posts of beryl, and banisters and finials of crystal.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.31.6 -->

The crystal stairs had posts of crystal, and banisters and finials of beryl.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.31.7 -->

It was surrounded by two balustrades, made of gold and silver.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.31.8 -->

The golden balustrades had posts of gold, and banisters and finials of silver.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.31.9 -->

The silver balustrades had posts of silver, and banisters and finials of gold.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.32.1 -->

It was surrounded by seven rows of palm trees,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.32.2 -->

made of gold, silver, beryl, crystal, ruby, emerald, and all precious things.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.32.3 -->

The golden palms had trunks of gold, and leaves and fruits of silver.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.32.4 -->

The silver palms had trunks of silver, and leaves and fruits of gold.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.32.5 -->

The beryl palms had trunks of beryl, and leaves and fruits of crystal.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.32.6 -->

The crystal palms had trunks of crystal, and leaves and fruits of beryl.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.32.7 -->

The ruby palms had trunks of ruby, and leaves and fruits of emerald.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.32.8 -->

The emerald palms had trunks of emerald, and leaves and fruits of ruby.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.32.9 -->

The palms of all precious things had trunks of all precious things, and leaves and fruits of all precious things.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.32.10 -->

When those rows of palm trees were blown by the wind they sounded graceful, tantalizing, sensuous, lovely, and intoxicating,

<!-- @segment dn17:1.32.11 -->

like a quintet made up of skilled musicians who had practiced well and kept excellent rhythm.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.32.12 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:1.32.13 -->

And any addicts, carousers, or drunkards in Kusāvatī at that time were entertained by that sound.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.33.1 -->

When the palace and its lotus pond were finished, King Mahāsudassana served those who were deemed true ascetics and brahmins with all they desired. Then he ascended the Palace of Principle.

<!-- @segment dn17:1.33.2 -->

The first recitation section.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.1.0 -->

5. Attaining Absorption

<!-- @segment dn17:2.1.1 -->

Then King Mahāsudassana thought,

<!-- @segment dn17:2.1.2 -->

‘Of what deed of mine is this the fruit and result, that I am now so mighty and powerful?’

<!-- @segment dn17:2.1.3 -->

Then King Mahāsudassana thought,

<!-- @segment dn17:2.1.4 -->

‘It is the fruit and result of three kinds of deeds:

<!-- @segment dn17:2.1.5 -->

giving, self-control, and restraint.’

<!-- @segment dn17:2.2.1 -->

Then he went to the Chamber of the Grand Tower, stood at the door, and expressed this heartfelt sentiment:

<!-- @segment dn17:2.2.2 -->

‘Stop here, sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts—

<!-- @segment dn17:2.2.3 -->

no further!’

<!-- @segment dn17:2.3.1 -->

Then he entered the Chamber of the Grand Tower and sat on the golden couch. Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, he entered and remained in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.3.2 -->

As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected were stilled, he entered and remained in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.3.3 -->

And with the fading away of rapture, he entered and remained in the third absorption, where he meditated with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’

<!-- @segment dn17:2.3.4 -->

With the giving up of pleasure and pain, and the ending of former happiness and sadness, he entered and remained in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.4.1 -->

Then King Mahāsudassana left the Chamber of the Grand Tower and entered the golden chamber, where he sat on the golden couch.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.4.2 -->

He meditated spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way he spread a heart full of love above, below, across, everywhere, all around, to everyone in the world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.4.3 -->

He meditated spreading a heart full of compassion …

<!-- @segment dn17:2.4.4 -->

He meditated spreading a heart full of rejoicing …

<!-- @segment dn17:2.4.5 -->

He meditated spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, he spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.5.0 -->

6. Of All Cities

<!-- @segment dn17:2.5.1 -->

King Mahāsudassana had 84,000 cities, with the royal capital of Kusāvatī the foremost.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.5.2 -->

He had 84,000 palaces, with the Palace of Principle the foremost.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.5.3 -->

He had 84,000 chambers, with the Chamber of the Grand Tower the foremost.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.5.4 -->

He had 84,000 couches made of gold, silver, ivory, and hardwood. They were spread with woollen covers—shag-piled, pure white, or embroidered with flowers—and spread with a fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red pillows at both ends.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.5.5 -->

He had 84,000 bull elephants with gold adornments and banners, covered with snow gold netting, with the royal bull elephant named Sabbath foremost.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.5.6 -->

He had 84,000 horses with gold adornments and banners, covered with snow gold netting, with the royal steed named Thundercloud foremost.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.5.7 -->

He had 84,000 chariots upholstered with the hide of lions, tigers, and leopards, and cream rugs, with gold adornments and banners, covered with snow gold netting, with the chariot named Triumph foremost.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.5.8 -->

He had 84,000 jewels, with the jewel-treasure foremost.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.5.9 -->

He had 84,000 women, with Queen Subhaddā foremost.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.5.10 -->

He had 84,000 householders, with the householder-treasure foremost.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.5.11 -->

He had 84,000 aristocrat vassals, with the commander-treasure foremost.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.5.12 -->

He had 84,000 milk-cows with silken halter and bronze pails.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.5.13 -->

He had 8,400,000,000 delicate cloths of linen, cotton, silk, and wool.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.5.14 -->

He had 84,000 servings of food, which were presented to him as offerings at daybreak and dusk.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.6.1 -->

Now at that time his 84,000 royal elephants came to attend on him at daybreak and dusk.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.6.2 -->

Then King Mahāsudassana thought,

<!-- @segment dn17:2.6.3 -->

‘What if instead half of the elephants took turns to attend on me at the end of each century?’

<!-- @segment dn17:2.6.4 -->

He instructed the commander-treasure to do this, and so it was done.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.6.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.6.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.6.7 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.7.0 -->

7. The Visit of Queen Subhaddā

<!-- @segment dn17:2.7.1 -->

Then, after many years, many hundred years, many thousand years had passed, Queen Subhaddā thought,

<!-- @segment dn17:2.7.2 -->

‘It is long since I have seen the king. Why don’t I go to see him?’

<!-- @segment dn17:2.7.3 -->

So the queen addressed the ladies of the harem,

<!-- @segment dn17:2.7.4 -->

‘Come, bathe your heads and dress in yellow.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.7.5 -->

It is long since we saw the king, and we shall go to see him.’

<!-- @segment dn17:2.7.6 -->

‘Yes, ma’am,’ replied the ladies of the harem. They did as she asked and returned to the queen.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.8.1 -->

Then the queen addressed the commander-treasure,

<!-- @segment dn17:2.8.2 -->

‘Dear commander-treasure, please ready the army of four divisions. It is long since we saw the king, and we shall go to see him.’

<!-- @segment dn17:2.8.3 -->

‘Yes, my queen,’ he replied, and did as he was asked. He informed the queen,

<!-- @segment dn17:2.8.4 -->

‘My queen, the army of four divisions is ready,

<!-- @segment dn17:2.8.5 -->

please go at your convenience.’

<!-- @segment dn17:2.8.6 -->

Then Queen Subhaddā together with the ladies of the harem went with the army to the Palace of Principle. She ascended the palace and went to the Chamber of the Grand Tower,

<!-- @segment dn17:2.8.7 -->

where she stood leaning against a door-post.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.8.8 -->

Hearing them, the king thought,

<!-- @segment dn17:2.8.9 -->

‘What’s that, it sounds like a big crowd!’ Coming out of the chamber he saw Queen Subhaddā leaning against a door-post and said to her,

<!-- @segment dn17:2.8.10 -->

‘Please stay there, my queen, don’t enter in here.’

<!-- @segment dn17:2.9.1 -->

Then he addressed a certain man,

<!-- @segment dn17:2.9.2 -->

‘Come, my man, bring the golden couch from the Chamber of the Grand Tower and set it up in the golden palm grove.’

<!-- @segment dn17:2.9.3 -->

‘Yes, Your Majesty,’ that man replied, and did as he was asked.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.9.4 -->

The king laid down in the lion’s posture—on the right side, placing one foot on top of the other—mindful and aware.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.1 -->

Then Queen Subhaddā thought,

<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.2 -->

‘The king’s faculties are so very clear, and the complexion of his skin is pure and bright. Let him not pass away!’ She said to him,

<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.3 -->

‘Sire, you have 84,000 cities, with the royal capital of Kusāvatī foremost.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.4 -->

Arouse desire for these! Take an interest in life!’

<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.5 -->

And she likewise urged the king to live on by taking an interest in all his possessions as described above.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.7 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.8 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.9 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.10 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.11 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.12 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.13 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.14 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.15 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.16 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.17 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.18 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.19 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.20 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.21 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.22 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.23 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.24 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.25 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.26 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.27 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.28 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.29 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.10.30 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.1 -->

When the queen had spoken, the king said to her,

<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.2 -->

‘For a long time, my queen, you have spoken to me with words that are welcome, desirable, agreeable, and pleasant.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.3 -->

And yet in my final hour, your words are unwelcome, undesirable, disagreeable, and unpleasant!’

<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.4 -->

‘So how then, Your Majesty, am I to speak to you?’

<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.5 -->

‘Like this, my queen:

<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.6 -->

“Sire, we must be parted and separated from all we hold dear and beloved. Don’t pass away with concerns. Such concern is suffering, and it’s criticized.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.7 -->

Sire, you have 84,000 cities, with the royal capital of Kusāvatī foremost.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.8 -->

Give up desire for these! Take no interest in life!”’

<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.9 -->

And so on for all the king’s possessions.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.10 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.11 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.12 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.13 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.14 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.15 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.16 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.17 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.18 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.19 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.20 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.21 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.22 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.23 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.24 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.25 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.26 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.27 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.28 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.29 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.30 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.31 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.32 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.33 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.11.34 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.1 -->

When the king had spoken, Queen Subhaddā cried and burst out in tears.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.2 -->

Wiping away her tears, the queen said to the king:

<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.3 -->

‘Sire, we must be parted and separated from all we hold dear and beloved. Don’t pass away with concerns. Such concern is suffering, and it’s criticized.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.4 -->

Sire, you have 84,000 cities, with the royal capital of Kusāvatī foremost.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.5 -->

Give up desire for these! Take no interest in life!’

<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.6 -->

And she continued, listing all the king’s possessions.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.7 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.8 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.9 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.10 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.11 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.12 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.13 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.14 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.15 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.16 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.17 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.18 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.19 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.20 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.21 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.22 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.23 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.24 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.25 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.26 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.27 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.28 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.29 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.30 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.12.31 -->



<!-- @segment dn17:2.13.0 -->

8. Rebirth in the Realm of Divinity

<!-- @segment dn17:2.13.1 -->

Not long after that, King Mahāsudassana passed away.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.13.2 -->

And the feeling he had close to death was like a householder or their child falling asleep after eating a satisfying meal.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.13.3 -->

When he passed away King Mahāsudassana was reborn in a good place, a realm of divinity.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.13.4 -->

Ānanda, King Mahāsudassana played children’s games for 84,000 years.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.13.5 -->

He ruled as viceroy for 84,000 years.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.13.6 -->

He ruled as king for 84,000 years.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.13.7 -->

He led the spiritual life as a layman in the Palace of Principle for 84,000 years.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.13.8 -->

And having developed the four divine meditations, when his body broke up, after death, he was reborn in a good place, a realm of divinity.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.14.1 -->

Now, Ānanda, you might think:

<!-- @segment dn17:2.14.2 -->

‘Surely King Mahāsudassana must have been someone else at that time?’

<!-- @segment dn17:2.14.3 -->

But you should not see it like that. I myself was King Mahāsudassana at that time.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.14.4 -->

Mine were the 84,000 cities, with the royal capital of Kusāvatī foremost. And mine were all the other possessions.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.15.1 -->

Of those 84,000 cities, I only stayed in one, the capital Kusāvatī.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.15.2 -->

Of those 84,000 palaces, I only dwelt in one, the Palace of Principle.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.15.3 -->

Of those 84,000 chambers, I only dwelt in the Chamber of the Grand Tower.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.15.4 -->

Of those 84,000 couches, I only used one, made of gold or silver or ivory or heartwood.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.15.5 -->

Of those 84,000 bull elephants, I only rode one, the royal bull elephant named Sabbath.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.15.6 -->

Of those 84,000 horses, I only rode one, the royal horse named Thundercloud.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.15.7 -->

Of those 84,000 chariots, I only rode one, the chariot named Triumph.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.15.8 -->

Of those 84,000 women, I was only served by one, an aristocrat maiden or a coquette.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.15.9 -->

Of those 8,400,000,000 cloths, I only wore one pair, made of delicate linen, cotton, silk, or wool.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.15.10 -->

Of those 84,000 servings of food, I only had one, eating at most a cup of rice with suitable sauce.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.16.1 -->

See, Ānanda! All those conditioned phenomena have passed, ceased, and perished.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.16.2 -->

So impermanent are conditions,

<!-- @segment dn17:2.16.3 -->

so unstable are conditions,

<!-- @segment dn17:2.16.4 -->

so unreliable are conditions.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.16.5 -->

This is quite enough for you to become disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding all conditions.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.17.1 -->

Six times, Ānanda, I recall having laid down my body at this place. And the seventh time was as a wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king, at which time my dominion extended to all four sides, I achieved stability in the country, and I possessed the seven treasures.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.17.2 -->

But Ānanda, I do not see any place in this world with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans where the Realized One would lay down his body for the eighth time.”

<!-- @segment dn17:2.17.3 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment dn17:2.17.4 -->

Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

<!-- @segment dn17:2.17.5 -->

“Oh! Conditions are impermanent,

<!-- @segment dn17:2.17.6 -->

their nature is to rise and fall;

<!-- @segment dn17:2.17.7 -->

having arisen, they cease;

<!-- @segment dn17:2.17.8 -->

their settling is such bliss.”
