---
slug: dn18
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: With Janavasabha
description: The spirit Janavasabha reports to the Buddha how people from Ñātika were reborn among gods; the Buddha then teaches the path of ethics, immersion, and wisdom that leads to the Brahmā world and beyond.
qualities: ethical conduct, collectedness, faith, wisdom, liberation
theme: story, training guideline
---

<!-- @segment dn18:1.0 -->

1. Declaring the Rebirths of People From Ñātika and Elsewhere

<!-- @segment dn18:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment dn18:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying at Ñātika in the brick house.

<!-- @segment dn18:1.3 -->

Now at that time the Buddha was explaining the rebirths of devotees all over the nations; the Kāsis and Kosalans, Vajjis and Mallas, Cetīs and Vacchas, Kurus and Pañcālas, Macchas and Sūrasenas:

<!-- @segment dn18:1.4 -->

“This one was reborn here, while that one was reborn there.

<!-- @segment dn18:1.5 -->

Over fifty devotees in Ñātika have passed away having ended the five lower fetters. They’ve been reborn spontaneously, and will be extinguished there, not liable to return from that world.

<!-- @segment dn18:1.6 -->

More than ninety devotees in Ñātika have passed away having ended three fetters, and weakened greed, hate, and delusion. They’re once-returners, who will come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering.

<!-- @segment dn18:1.7 -->

More than five hundred devotees in Ñātika have passed away having ended three fetters. They’re stream-enterers, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, assured, destined for awakening.”

<!-- @segment dn18:2.1 -->

When the devotees of Ñātika heard about the Buddha’s

<!-- @segment dn18:2.2 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:2.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:2.4 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:2.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:2.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:2.7 -->

answers to those questions, they became uplifted and overjoyed, full of rapture and happiness.

<!-- @segment dn18:3.1 -->

Venerable Ānanda heard of the Buddha’s statements and the Ñātikans’ happiness.

<!-- @segment dn18:3.2 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:3.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:3.4 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:3.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:3.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:3.7 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:4.0 -->

2. Ānanda’s Suggestion

<!-- @segment dn18:4.1 -->

Then Venerable Ānanda thought,

<!-- @segment dn18:4.2 -->

“But there were also Magadhan devotees—many, and of long standing too—who have passed away.

<!-- @segment dn18:4.3 -->

You’d think that Aṅga and Magadha were empty of devotees who have passed away!

<!-- @segment dn18:4.4 -->

But they too had confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and had fulfilled their ethics.

<!-- @segment dn18:4.5 -->

The Buddha hasn’t declared their passing.

<!-- @segment dn18:4.6 -->

It would be good to do so, for many people would gain confidence, and so be reborn in a good place.

<!-- @segment dn18:4.7 -->

That King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha was a just and principled king who benefited the brahmins and householders, and people of town and country.

<!-- @segment dn18:4.8 -->

People still sing his praises:

<!-- @segment dn18:4.9 -->

‘That just and principled king, who made us so happy, has passed away. Life was good under his dominion.’

<!-- @segment dn18:4.10 -->

He too had confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and had fulfilled his ethics.

<!-- @segment dn18:4.11 -->

People say:

<!-- @segment dn18:4.12 -->

‘Until his dying day, King Bimbisāra sang the Buddha’s praises!’

<!-- @segment dn18:4.13 -->

The Buddha hasn’t declared his passing.

<!-- @segment dn18:4.14 -->

It would be good to do so, for many people would gain confidence, and so be reborn in a good place.

<!-- @segment dn18:4.15 -->

Besides, the Buddha was awakened in Magadha;

<!-- @segment dn18:4.16 -->

so why hasn’t he declared the rebirth of the Magadhan devotees?

<!-- @segment dn18:4.17 -->

If he fails to do so, they will be disheartened.”

<!-- @segment dn18:4.18 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:5.1 -->

After pondering the fate of the Magadhan devotees alone in private, Ānanda rose at the crack of dawn and went to see the Buddha. He bowed, sat down to one side, and told the Buddha of his concerns, finishing by saying,

<!-- @segment dn18:5.2 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:5.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:5.4 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:5.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:5.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:5.7 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:5.8 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:5.9 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:5.10 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:5.11 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:5.12 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:5.13 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:5.14 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:5.15 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:5.16 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:6.1 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:6.2 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:6.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:6.4 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:6.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:6.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:6.7 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:6.8 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:6.9 -->

“Why hasn’t the Buddha declared the rebirth of the Magadhan devotees? If he fails to do so, they will be disheartened.”

<!-- @segment dn18:6.10 -->

Then Ānanda, after making this suggestion regarding the Magadhan devotees, rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

<!-- @segment dn18:7.1 -->

Soon after Ānanda had left, the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Ñātika for alms.

<!-- @segment dn18:7.2 -->

He wandered for alms in Ñātika. After the meal, on his return from almsround, he washed his feet and entered the brick house. He paid attention, applied the mind, and concentrated wholeheartedly on the fate of Magadhan devotees, and sat on the seat spread out, thinking,

<!-- @segment dn18:7.3 -->

“I shall know their destiny, where they are reborn in the next life.”

<!-- @segment dn18:7.4 -->

And he saw where they had been reborn.

<!-- @segment dn18:7.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:7.6 -->

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat. Emerging from the brick house, he sat on the seat spread out in the shade of the porch.

<!-- @segment dn18:8.1 -->

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,

<!-- @segment dn18:8.2 -->

“Sir, you look so serene; your face seems to shine owing to the clarity of your faculties.

<!-- @segment dn18:8.3 -->

Have you been abiding in a peaceful meditation today, sir?”

<!-- @segment dn18:9.1 -->

The Buddha then recounted what had happened since speaking to Ānanda, revealing that he had seen the destiny of the Magadhan devotees. He continued:

<!-- @segment dn18:9.2 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:9.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:9.4.0 -->

3. Janavasabha the Spirit

<!-- @segment dn18:9.5 -->

“Then, Ānanda, an invisible spirit called out:

<!-- @segment dn18:9.6 -->

‘I am Janavasabha, Blessed One!

<!-- @segment dn18:9.7 -->

I am Janavasabha, Holy One!’

<!-- @segment dn18:9.8 -->

Ānanda, do you recall having previously heard such a name as Janavasabha?”

<!-- @segment dn18:9.9 -->

“No, worthy sir. But when I heard the word, I got goosebumps!

<!-- @segment dn18:9.10 -->

I thought,

<!-- @segment dn18:9.11 -->

‘This must be no ordinary spirit to bear such an exalted name as Janavasabha.’”

<!-- @segment dn18:10.1 -->

“After making himself heard while vanished, Ānanda, a very beautiful spirit appeared in front of me.

<!-- @segment dn18:10.2 -->

And for a second time he called out:

<!-- @segment dn18:10.3 -->

‘I am Bimbisāra, Blessed One!

<!-- @segment dn18:10.4 -->

I am Bimbisāra, Holy One!

<!-- @segment dn18:10.5 -->

This is the seventh time I am reborn in the company of the Great King Vessavaṇa. When I pass away from here, I can become a king of men.

<!-- @segment dn18:10.6 -->

Seven from here, seven from there—

<!-- @segment dn18:10.7 -->

fourteen transmigrations in all.

<!-- @segment dn18:10.8 -->

I remember these lives

<!-- @segment dn18:10.9 -->

where I lived before.

<!-- @segment dn18:10.10 -->

For a long time I’ve known that I won’t be reborn in the underworld, but that I still hope to become a once-returner.’

<!-- @segment dn18:10.11 -->

‘It’s incredible and amazing that you, the venerable spirit Janavasabha, should say:

<!-- @segment dn18:10.12 -->

“For a long time I’ve been aware that I won’t be reborn in the underworld” and also “But I still hope to become a once-returner.” But from what source do you know that you’ve achieved such a high distinction?’

<!-- @segment dn18:11.1 -->

‘None other than the Blessed One’s instruction! None other than the Holy One’s instruction!

<!-- @segment dn18:11.2 -->

From the day I had absolute devotion to the Buddha I have known that I won’t be reborn in the underworld, but that I still hope to become a once-returner.

<!-- @segment dn18:11.3 -->

Just now, sir, I had been sent out by the great king Vessavaṇa to the great king Virūḷhaka’s presence on some business, and on the way I saw the Buddha giving his attention to the fate of the Magadhan devotees.

<!-- @segment dn18:11.4 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:11.5 -->

But it comes as no surprise that I have heard and learned the fate of the Magadhan devotees in the presence of the great king Vessavaṇa as he was speaking to his assembly.

<!-- @segment dn18:11.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:11.7 -->

It occurred to me,

<!-- @segment dn18:11.8 -->

“I shall see the Buddha and inform him of this.”

<!-- @segment dn18:11.9 -->

These are the two reasons I’ve come to see the Buddha.

<!-- @segment dn18:12.0 -->

4. The Council of the Gods

<!-- @segment dn18:12.1 -->

Sir, it was more than a few days ago—on the fifteenth day sabbath on the full moon day at the entry to the rainy season—when all the gods of the thirty-three were sitting together in the Hall of Clear Right.

<!-- @segment dn18:12.2 -->

A large assembly of gods was sitting all around, and the four great kings were seated at the four quarters.

<!-- @segment dn18:12.3 -->

The Great King Dhataraṭṭha was seated to the east, facing west, in front of his gods.

<!-- @segment dn18:12.4 -->

The Great King Virūḷhaka was seated to the south, facing north, in front of his gods.

<!-- @segment dn18:12.5 -->

The Great King Virūpakkha was seated to the west, facing east, in front of his gods.

<!-- @segment dn18:12.6 -->

The Great King Vessavaṇa was seated to the north, facing south, in front of his gods.

<!-- @segment dn18:12.7 -->

When the gods of the thirty-three have a gathering like this, that is how they are seated.

<!-- @segment dn18:12.8 -->

After that come our seats.

<!-- @segment dn18:12.9 -->

Sir, those gods who had been recently reborn in the company of the thirty-three after leading the spiritual life under the Buddha outshone the other gods in beauty and glory.

<!-- @segment dn18:12.10 -->

The gods of the thirty-three became uplifted and overjoyed at that, full of rapture and happiness, saying,

<!-- @segment dn18:12.11 -->

“The heavenly hosts swell, while the titan hosts dwindle!”

<!-- @segment dn18:13.1 -->

Seeing the joy of those gods, Sakka, lord of gods, celebrated with these verses:

<!-- @segment dn18:13.2 -->

“The gods rejoice—

<!-- @segment dn18:13.3 -->

the thirty-three with their Lord—

<!-- @segment dn18:13.4 -->

revering the Realized One,

<!-- @segment dn18:13.5 -->

and the clear rightness of the teaching;

<!-- @segment dn18:13.6 -->

and seeing the new gods,

<!-- @segment dn18:13.7 -->

so beautiful and glorious,

<!-- @segment dn18:13.8 -->

who have come here after leading

<!-- @segment dn18:13.9 -->

the spiritual life under the Buddha!

<!-- @segment dn18:13.10 -->

They outshine the others

<!-- @segment dn18:13.11 -->

in beauty, glory, and lifespan.

<!-- @segment dn18:13.12 -->

Here are the distinguished disciples

<!-- @segment dn18:13.13 -->

of he whose wisdom is vast.

<!-- @segment dn18:13.14 -->

Seeing this, they delight—

<!-- @segment dn18:13.15 -->

the thirty-three with their Lord—

<!-- @segment dn18:13.16 -->

revering the Realized One,

<!-- @segment dn18:13.17 -->

and the clear rightness of the teaching.”

<!-- @segment dn18:13.18 -->

The gods of the thirty-three became even more uplifted and overjoyed at that, saying:

<!-- @segment dn18:13.19 -->

“The heavenly hosts swell, while the titan hosts dwindle!”

<!-- @segment dn18:14.1 -->

Then the gods of the thirty-three, having considered and deliberated on the matter for which they were seated together in the Hall of Clear Right, advised and instructed the four great kings on the subject.

<!-- @segment dn18:14.2 -->

Each one, having been advised, stood at his own seat without leaving.

<!-- @segment dn18:14.3 -->

The Kings were instructed,

<!-- @segment dn18:14.4 -->

and heeded good advice.

<!-- @segment dn18:14.5 -->

With clear and peaceful minds,

<!-- @segment dn18:14.6 -->

they stood by their own seats.

<!-- @segment dn18:15.1 -->

Then in the northern quarter a magnificent light arose and radiance appeared, surpassing the glory of the gods.

<!-- @segment dn18:15.2 -->

Then Sakka, lord of gods, addressed the gods of the thirty-three,

<!-- @segment dn18:15.3 -->

“As indicated by the signs—light arising and radiance appearing—The Divinity will appear. For this is the harbinger for the appearance of the Divinity, namely light arising and radiance appearing.”

<!-- @segment dn18:15.4 -->

As indicated by the signs,

<!-- @segment dn18:15.5 -->

The Divinity will appear.

<!-- @segment dn18:15.6 -->

For this is the sign of the Divinity:

<!-- @segment dn18:15.7 -->

a light vast and great.

<!-- @segment dn18:16.0 -->

5. On Sanaṅkumāra

<!-- @segment dn18:16.1 -->

Then the gods of the thirty-three sat in their own seats, saying,

<!-- @segment dn18:16.2 -->

“We shall find out what has caused that light, and only when we have realized it shall we go to it.”

<!-- @segment dn18:16.3 -->

And the four great kings did likewise.

<!-- @segment dn18:16.4 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:16.5 -->

Hearing that, the gods of the thirty-three agreed in unison,

<!-- @segment dn18:16.6 -->

“We shall find out what has caused that light, and only when we have realized it shall we go to it.”

<!-- @segment dn18:17.1 -->

When the divinity Sanaṅkumāra appears to the gods of the thirty-three, he does so after manifesting a solid incarnation.

<!-- @segment dn18:17.2 -->

For a Divinity’s normal appearance is imperceptible in the visual range of the gods of the thirty-three.

<!-- @segment dn18:17.3 -->

When the divinity Sanaṅkumāra appears to the gods of the thirty-three, he outshines the other gods in beauty and glory,

<!-- @segment dn18:17.4 -->

as a golden statue outshines the human form.

<!-- @segment dn18:17.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:17.6 -->

When the divinity Sanaṅkumāra appears to the gods of the thirty-three, not a single god in that assembly greets him by bowing down or rising up or inviting him to a seat.

<!-- @segment dn18:17.7 -->

They all sit silently on their couches with their cupped palms raised, thinking,

<!-- @segment dn18:17.8 -->

“Now the divinity Sanaṅkumāra will sit on the couch of whatever god he chooses.”

<!-- @segment dn18:17.9 -->

And the god on whose couch the Divinity sits is overjoyed and brimming with happiness,

<!-- @segment dn18:18.1 -->

like a king on the day of his coronation.

<!-- @segment dn18:18.2 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:18.3 -->

Then the divinity Sanaṅkumāra manifested a solid incarnation, taking on the appearance of the youth Pañcasikha, and appeared to the gods of the thirty-three.

<!-- @segment dn18:18.4 -->

Rising into the air, he sat cross-legged in the sky,

<!-- @segment dn18:18.5 -->

like a strong man might sit cross-legged on a well-appointed couch or on level ground.

<!-- @segment dn18:18.6 -->

Seeing the joy of those gods, the divinity Sanaṅkumāra celebrated with these verses:

<!-- @segment dn18:18.7 -->

“The gods rejoice—

<!-- @segment dn18:18.8 -->

the thirty-three with their Lord—

<!-- @segment dn18:18.9 -->

revering the Realized One,

<!-- @segment dn18:18.10 -->

and the clear rightness of the teaching;

<!-- @segment dn18:18.11 -->

and seeing the new gods,

<!-- @segment dn18:18.12 -->

so beautiful and glorious,

<!-- @segment dn18:18.13 -->

who have come here after leading

<!-- @segment dn18:18.14 -->

the spiritual life under the Buddha!

<!-- @segment dn18:18.15 -->

They outshine the others

<!-- @segment dn18:18.16 -->

in beauty, glory, and lifespan.

<!-- @segment dn18:18.17 -->

Here are the distinguished disciples

<!-- @segment dn18:18.18 -->

of he whose wisdom is vast.

<!-- @segment dn18:18.19 -->

Seeing this, they delight—

<!-- @segment dn18:18.20 -->

the thirty-three with their Lord—

<!-- @segment dn18:18.21 -->

revering the Realized One,

<!-- @segment dn18:18.22 -->

and the clear rightness of the teaching!”

<!-- @segment dn18:19.1 -->

That is the topic on which the divinity Sanaṅkumāra spoke.

<!-- @segment dn18:19.2 -->

And while he was speaking on that topic, his voice had eight qualities: it was clear, comprehensible, charming, audible, lucid, undistorted, deep, and resonant.

<!-- @segment dn18:19.3 -->

He makes sure his voice is intelligible as far as the assembly goes, but the sound doesn’t extend outside the assembly.

<!-- @segment dn18:19.4 -->

When someone has a voice like this, they’re said to have the voice of the Divinity.

<!-- @segment dn18:20.1 -->

Then the divinity Sanaṅkumāra, having manifested thirty-three life-forms, sat down on the couches of each of the gods of the thirty-three and addressed them,

<!-- @segment dn18:20.2 -->

“What do the good gods of the thirty-three think? How the Buddha has acted for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans!

<!-- @segment dn18:20.3 -->

For consider those who have gone for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and have fulfilled their ethics. When their bodies break up, after death, some are reborn in the company of the gods who control what is created by others, some with the gods who love to create, some with the joyful gods, some with the gods of Yama, some with the gods of the thirty-three, and some with the gods of the four great kings.

<!-- @segment dn18:20.4 -->

And at the very least they swell the hosts of the centaurs.”

<!-- @segment dn18:21.1 -->

That is the topic on which the divinity Sanaṅkumāra spoke.

<!-- @segment dn18:21.2 -->

And hearing the sound of the Divinity speaking on that topic, the gods fancied,

<!-- @segment dn18:21.3 -->

“The one sitting on my couch is the only one speaking.”

<!-- @segment dn18:21.4 -->

When one is speaking,

<!-- @segment dn18:21.5 -->

all the forms speak.

<!-- @segment dn18:21.6 -->

When one sits in silence,

<!-- @segment dn18:21.7 -->

they all remain silent.

<!-- @segment dn18:21.8 -->

But those gods imagine—

<!-- @segment dn18:21.9 -->

the thirty-three with their Lord—

<!-- @segment dn18:21.10 -->

that the one on their seat

<!-- @segment dn18:21.11 -->

is the only one to speak.

<!-- @segment dn18:22.1 -->

Next the divinity Sanaṅkumāra merged into one corporeal form. Then he sat on the couch of Sakka, lord of gods, and addressed the gods of the thirty-three:

<!-- @segment dn18:22.2.0 -->

6. Developing the Bases of Psychic Power

<!-- @segment dn18:22.3 -->

“What do the good gods of the thirty-three think? How well described by the Blessed One—who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha—are the four bases of psychic power! They are taught for the amplification, burgeoning, and transformation of psychic power.

<!-- @segment dn18:22.4 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment dn18:22.5 -->

It’s when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort.

<!-- @segment dn18:22.6 -->

They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy, and active effort.

<!-- @segment dn18:22.7 -->

They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and active effort.

<!-- @segment dn18:22.8 -->

They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry, and active effort.

<!-- @segment dn18:22.9 -->

These are the four bases of psychic power taught by the Buddha for the amplification, burgeoning, and transformation of psychic power.

<!-- @segment dn18:22.10 -->

All the ascetics and brahmins in the past,

<!-- @segment dn18:22.11 -->

future,

<!-- @segment dn18:22.12 -->

or present who wield the many kinds of psychic power do so by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power.

<!-- @segment dn18:22.13 -->

Gentlemen, do you see such psychic might and power in me?”

<!-- @segment dn18:22.14 -->

“Yes, Great Divinity.”

<!-- @segment dn18:22.15 -->

“I too became so mighty and powerful by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power.”

<!-- @segment dn18:23.1 -->

That is the topic on which the divinity Sanaṅkumāra spoke.

<!-- @segment dn18:23.2 -->

And having spoken about that, he addressed the gods of the thirty-three:

<!-- @segment dn18:23.3.0 -->

7. The Three Openings

<!-- @segment dn18:23.4 -->

“What do the good gods of the thirty-three think? How well understood by the Buddha are the three opportunities for achieving happiness!

<!-- @segment dn18:23.5 -->

What three?

<!-- @segment dn18:23.6 -->

First, take someone who lives mixed up with sensual pleasures and unskillful qualities.

<!-- @segment dn18:23.7 -->

After some time they hear the teaching of the noble ones, rationally apply the mind to how it applies to them, and practice in line with the teaching.

<!-- @segment dn18:23.8 -->

They live aloof from sensual pleasures and unskillful qualities.

<!-- @segment dn18:23.9 -->

That gives rise to pleasure, and more than pleasure, happiness,

<!-- @segment dn18:23.10 -->

like the joy that’s born from gladness.

<!-- @segment dn18:23.11 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:23.12 -->

This is the first opportunity for achieving happiness.

<!-- @segment dn18:24.1 -->

Next, take someone whose coarse physical, verbal, and mental processes have not died down.

<!-- @segment dn18:24.2 -->

After some time they hear the teaching of the noble ones, rationally apply the mind to how it applies to them, and practice in line with the teaching.

<!-- @segment dn18:24.3 -->

Their coarse physical, verbal, and mental processes die down.

<!-- @segment dn18:24.4 -->

That gives rise to pleasure, and more than pleasure, happiness,

<!-- @segment dn18:24.5 -->

like the joy that’s born from gladness.

<!-- @segment dn18:24.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:24.7 -->

This is the second opportunity for achieving happiness.

<!-- @segment dn18:25.1 -->

Next, take someone who doesn’t truly understand what is skillful and what is unskillful,

<!-- @segment dn18:25.2 -->

what is blameworthy and what is blameless, what should be cultivated and what should not be cultivated, what is inferior and what is superior, and what has a portion of dark or bright.

<!-- @segment dn18:25.3 -->

After some time they hear the teaching of the noble ones, rationally apply the mind to how it applies to them, and practice in line with the teaching.

<!-- @segment dn18:25.4 -->

They truly understand what is skillful and what is unskillful, and so on.

<!-- @segment dn18:25.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:25.6 -->

Knowing and seeing like this, ignorance is given up and knowledge arises.

<!-- @segment dn18:25.7 -->

That gives rise to pleasure, and more than pleasure, happiness,

<!-- @segment dn18:25.8 -->

like the joy that’s born from gladness.

<!-- @segment dn18:25.9 -->



<!-- @segment dn18:25.10 -->

This is the third opportunity for achieving happiness.

<!-- @segment dn18:25.11 -->

These are the three opportunities for achieving happiness that have been understood by the Buddha.”

<!-- @segment dn18:26.1 -->

That is the topic on which the divinity Sanaṅkumāra spoke.

<!-- @segment dn18:26.2 -->

And having spoken about that, he addressed the gods of the thirty-three:

<!-- @segment dn18:26.3.0 -->

8. Mindfulness Meditation

<!-- @segment dn18:26.4 -->

“What do the good gods of the thirty-three think? How well described by the Buddha are the four kinds of mindfulness meditation! They are taught for achieving what is skillful.

<!-- @segment dn18:26.5 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment dn18:26.6 -->

It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body internally—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment dn18:26.7 -->

As they meditate in this way, they become rightly immersed in that, and rightly serene.

<!-- @segment dn18:26.8 -->

Then they give rise to knowledge and vision of other people’s bodies externally.

<!-- @segment dn18:26.9 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings internally …

<!-- @segment dn18:26.10 -->

Then they give rise to knowledge and vision of other people’s feelings externally.

<!-- @segment dn18:26.11 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of the mind internally …

<!-- @segment dn18:26.12 -->

Then they give rise to knowledge and vision of other people’s minds externally.

<!-- @segment dn18:26.13 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of principles internally—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment dn18:26.14 -->

As they meditate in this way, they become rightly immersed in that, and rightly serene.

<!-- @segment dn18:26.15 -->

Then they give rise to knowledge and vision of other people’s principles externally.

<!-- @segment dn18:26.16 -->

These are the four kinds of mindfulness meditation taught by the Buddha for achieving what is skillful.”

<!-- @segment dn18:27.1 -->

That is the topic on which the divinity Sanaṅkumāra spoke.

<!-- @segment dn18:27.2 -->

And having spoken about that, he addressed the gods of the thirty-three:

<!-- @segment dn18:27.3.0 -->

9. Seven Prerequisites of Immersion

<!-- @segment dn18:27.4 -->

“What do the good gods of the thirty-three think? How well described by the Buddha are the seven prerequisites of immersion for the development and fulfillment of right immersion!

<!-- @segment dn18:27.5 -->

What seven?

<!-- @segment dn18:27.6 -->

Right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, and right mindfulness.

<!-- @segment dn18:27.7 -->

Unification of mind with these seven factors as prerequisites is called noble right immersion ‘with its vital conditions’ and also ‘with its prerequisites’.

<!-- @segment dn18:27.8 -->

Right view produces right purpose. Right purpose produces right speech. Right speech produces right action. Right action produces right livelihood. Right livelihood produces right effort. Right effort produces right mindfulness. Right mindfulness produces right immersion. Right immersion produces right knowledge. Right knowledge produces right freedom.

<!-- @segment dn18:27.9 -->

If anything should be rightly described as

<!-- @segment dn18:27.10 -->

‘a teaching that’s well explained by the Buddha, apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves; and the doors to freedom from death are flung open,’ it’s this.

<!-- @segment dn18:27.11 -->

For the teaching is well explained by the Buddha—apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves—and the doors to freedom from death are flung open.

<!-- @segment dn18:27.12 -->

Whoever has experiential confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and has the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones; and whoever is spontaneously reborn, and is trained in the teaching; more than 2,400,000 such Magadhan devotees have passed away having ended three fetters. They’re stream-enterers, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, assured, destined for awakening.

<!-- @segment dn18:27.13 -->

And there are once-returners here, too.

<!-- @segment dn18:27.14 -->

And as for the rest of folk,

<!-- @segment dn18:27.15 -->

who I think have shared in merit—

<!-- @segment dn18:27.16 -->

I couldn’t even number them,

<!-- @segment dn18:27.17 -->

for fear of speaking falsely.”

<!-- @segment dn18:28.1 -->

That is the topic on which the divinity Sanaṅkumāra spoke. And while he was speaking on that topic, this thought came to the great king Vessavaṇa,

<!-- @segment dn18:28.2 -->

“Oh lord, how incredible, how amazing! That there should be such a magnificent Teacher, and such a magnificent exposition of the teaching! And that such achievements of high distinction should be made known!”

<!-- @segment dn18:28.3 -->

And then the divinity Sanaṅkumāra, knowing the great king Vessavaṇa’s train of thought, said to him,

<!-- @segment dn18:28.4 -->

“What does Great King Vessavaṇa think? In the past, too, there was such a magnificent Teacher, and such a magnificent exposition of the teaching! And such achievements of high distinction were made known!

<!-- @segment dn18:28.5 -->

In the future, too, there will be such a magnificent Teacher, and such a magnificent exposition of the teaching! And such achievements of high distinction will be made known!”

<!-- @segment dn18:29.1 -->

That, sir, is the topic on which the divinity Sanaṅkumāra spoke to the gods of the thirty-three. And the great king Vessavaṇa, having heard and learned it in the presence of the Divinity as he was speaking on that topic, informed his own assembly.’”

<!-- @segment dn18:29.2 -->

And the spirit Janavasabha, having heard and learned it in the presence of the great king Vessavaṇa as he was speaking on that topic to his own assembly, informed the Buddha.

<!-- @segment dn18:29.3 -->

And the Buddha, having heard and learned it in the presence of the spirit Janavasabha, and also from his own direct knowledge, informed Venerable Ānanda. And Venerable Ānanda, having heard and learned it in the presence of the Buddha, informed the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen.

<!-- @segment dn18:29.4 -->

And that’s how this spiritual life has become successful and prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and well proclaimed wherever there are gods and humans.
