---
slug: dn21
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Sakka’s Questions
description: "Sakka, lord of gods, visits the Buddha on Indra's hill and asks about the causes of fear, sorrow, and suffering; the Buddha answers with a series of questions leading to the uprooting of conceit and the end of suffering."
qualities: conceit, suffering, wisdom, examination, liberation
theme: wisdom, cultivating discernment
---

<!-- @segment dn21:1.1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Magadhans, where east of Rājagaha there is a brahmin village named Ambasaṇḍā, north of which, on Mount Vediyaka, is Indra’s hill cave.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.1.3 -->

Now at that time Sakka, the lord of gods, grew eager to see the Buddha.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.1.4 -->

He thought,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.1.5 -->

“Where is the Blessed One at present, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha?”

<!-- @segment dn21:1.1.6 -->

Seeing that the Buddha was at Indra’s hill cave,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.1.7 -->

he addressed the gods of the thirty-three,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.1.8 -->

“Good fellows, the Buddha is staying in the land of the Magadhans at Indra’s hill cave.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.1.9 -->

What if we were to go and see that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha?”

<!-- @segment dn21:1.1.10 -->

“Yes, lord,” replied the gods.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.2.1 -->

Then Sakka addressed the centaur Pañcasikha,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.2.2 -->

“Dear Pañcasikha, the Buddha is staying in the land of the Magadhans at Indra’s hill cave.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.2.3 -->

What if we were to go and see that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha?”

<!-- @segment dn21:1.2.4 -->

“Yes, lord,” replied the centaur Pañcasikha. Taking his arched harp made from the pale timber of wood-apple, he went as Sakka’s attendant.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.2.5 -->

Then Sakka went at the head of a retinue consisting of the gods of the thirty-three and the godling centaur Pañcasikha.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.2.6 -->

As easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from the heaven of the gods of the thirty-three and landed on Mount Vediyaka north of Ambasaṇḍā.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.3.1 -->

Now at that time a dazzling light appeared over Mount Vediyaka and Ambasaṇḍā, as happens through the glory of the gods.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.3.2 -->

People in the villages round about, terrified, shocked, and awestruck, said,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.3.3 -->

“Mount Vediyaka must be on fire today, blazing and burning!

<!-- @segment dn21:1.3.4 -->

Oh why has such a dazzling light appeared over Mount Vediyaka and Ambasaṇḍā?”

<!-- @segment dn21:1.3.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:1.4.1 -->

Then Sakka addressed the centaur Pañcasikha,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.4.2 -->

“My dear Pañcasikha, it is hard for one like me to get near the Realized Ones while they are on retreat practicing absorption, enjoying absorption.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.4.3 -->

But if you were to charm the Buddha first, then I could go to see him.”

<!-- @segment dn21:1.4.4 -->

“Yes, lord,” replied the centaur Pañcasikha. Taking his arched harp made from the pale timber of wood-apple, he went to Indra’s hill cave. When he had drawn near, he stood to one side, thinking,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.4.5 -->

“This is neither too far nor too near; and he’ll hear my voice.”

<!-- @segment dn21:1.4.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:1.4.7.0 -->

1. Pañcasikha’s Song

<!-- @segment dn21:1.4.8 -->

Standing to one side, Pañcasikha played his arched harp, and sang these verses on the Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the perfected ones, and sensual love.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.1 -->

“O Bhaddā Suriyavaccasā, my Darling Sunshine,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.2 -->

I pay homage to your father Timbaru,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.3 -->

through whom was born a lady so fine,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.4 -->

to fill me with a joy I never knew.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.5 -->

As sweet as a breeze to one who’s sweating,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.6 -->

or when thirsty, a sweet and cooling drink,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.7 -->

so dear are you, Aṅgīrasi, to me—

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.8 -->

just like the teaching is to all the saints!

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.9 -->

Like a cure when you’re struck by fever dire,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.10 -->

or food to ease the hunger pain,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.11 -->

come on, Bhaddā, please put out my fire,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.12 -->

quench me like water on a flame.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.13 -->

As elephants burning in the heat of summer,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.14 -->

sink down in a lotus pond to rest,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.15 -->

so cool, full of petals and of pollen—

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.16 -->

that’s how I would plunge into your breast.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.17 -->

Like elephants bursting bonds in rutting season,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.18 -->

beating off the pricks of lance and pikes—

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.19 -->

I just don’t understand what is the reason

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.20 -->

I’m so crazy for your shapely thighs!

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.21 -->

For you, my heart is full of passion,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.22 -->

I’m in a besotted state of mind.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.23 -->

There is no going back, I’m just not able,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.24 -->

I’m like a fish that’s hooked up on the line.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.25 -->

Come on, my Bhaddā, hold me, fair of thighs!

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.26 -->

Embrace me, maid of captivating eyes!

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.27 -->

Take me in your arms, my lovely lady,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.28 -->

that’s all I’d ever want or could desire.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.29 -->

Ah, then my desire was such a small thing,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.30 -->

my sweet, with your curling wavy hair;

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.31 -->

now, like to arahants an offering,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.32 -->

it’s grown so very much from there.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.33 -->

Whatever the merit I have forged

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.34 -->

by giving to such perfected beings—

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.35 -->

may that, my altogether gorgeous,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.36 -->

ripen in togetherness with you.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.37 -->

Whatever the merit I have forged

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.38 -->

in this vast territory,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.39 -->

may that, my altogether gorgeous,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.40 -->

ripen in togetherness with you.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.41 -->

As the Sakyan, absorbed, did meditate

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.42 -->

at one, alert, and mindful too,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.43 -->

the sage seeking the state free of death—

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.44 -->

so I, oh my Sunshine, seek for you!

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.45 -->

And just like the sage would delight,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.46 -->

once he had awakened to the truth,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.47 -->

so I would delight, my fine lady,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.48 -->

were I to become one with you.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.49 -->

If Sakka were to grant me one wish,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.50 -->

as Lord of the Thirty and Three,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.51 -->

my Bhaddā, you’re all I would wish for,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.52 -->

so strong is the love in me.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.53 -->

Like a freshly blossoming sal tree

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.54 -->

is your father, my lady so wise.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.55 -->

I pay homage to he, bowing humbly,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.5.56 -->

whose daughter is of such a kind.”

<!-- @segment dn21:1.6.1 -->

When Pañcasikha had spoken, the Buddha said to him,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.6.2 -->

“Pañcasikha, the sound of your strings blends well with the sound of your singing,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.6.3 -->

so that neither overpowers the other.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.6.4 -->

But when did you compose these verses on the Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the perfected ones, and sensual love?”

<!-- @segment dn21:1.6.5 -->

“This one time, sir, when you were first awakened, you were staying in Uruvelā at the goatherd’s banyan tree on the bank of the Nerañjarā River.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.6.6 -->

And at that time I was in love with Bhaddā Suriyavaccasā, who they call ‘Darling Sunshine’, the daughter of the centaur king Timbaru.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.6.7 -->

But the sister desired another.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.6.8 -->

It was the one named Sikhaṇḍī, the son of Mātali the chariot handler, who she loved.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.6.9 -->

Since I couldn’t win that sister by any means,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.6.10 -->

I took my arched harp to Timbaru’s home, where I played those verses.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.7.1 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:1.7.2 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:1.7.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:1.7.4 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:1.7.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:1.7.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:1.7.7 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:1.7.8 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:1.7.9 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:1.7.10 -->

When I finished, Suriyavaccasā said to me,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.7.11 -->

‘Good fellow, I have not personally seen the Buddha. But I did hear about him when I went to dance for the gods of the thirty-three in the Hall of Clear Right.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.7.12 -->

Since you extol the Buddha, let us meet up today.’

<!-- @segment dn21:1.7.13 -->

And that’s when I met up with that sister.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.7.14 -->

But we have not met since.”

<!-- @segment dn21:1.8.0 -->

2. The Approach of Sakka

<!-- @segment dn21:1.8.1 -->

Then Sakka, lord of gods, thought,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.8.2 -->

“Pañcasikha is exchanging pleasantries with the Buddha.”

<!-- @segment dn21:1.8.3 -->

So he addressed Pañcasikha,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.8.4 -->

“My dear Pañcasikha, please bow to the Buddha for me, saying:

<!-- @segment dn21:1.8.5 -->

‘Sir, Sakka, lord of gods, with his ministers and retinue, bows with his head at your feet.’”

<!-- @segment dn21:1.8.6 -->

“Yes, lord,” replied Pañcasikha. He bowed to the Buddha and said,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.8.7 -->

“Sir, Sakka, lord of gods, with his ministers and retinue, bows with his head at your feet.”

<!-- @segment dn21:1.8.8 -->

“So may Sakka with his ministers and retinue be happy, Pañcasikha,” said the Buddha,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.8.9 -->

“for all want to be happy—whether gods, humans, titans, dragons, centaurs, or any of the other diverse creatures there may be.”

<!-- @segment dn21:1.8.10 -->

For that is how the Realized Ones salute such illustrious spirits.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.8.11 -->

And being saluted by the Buddha, Sakka entered Indra’s hill cave, bowed to the Buddha, and stood to one side.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.8.12 -->

And the gods of the thirty-three did likewise,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.8.13 -->

as did Pañcasikha.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.9.1 -->

And at that time the uneven places were evened out, the cramped places were opened up, the darkness vanished in the cave and light appeared, as happens through the glory of the gods.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.9.2 -->

Then the Buddha said to Sakka,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.9.3 -->

“It’s incredible and amazing that you, the venerable Kosiya, who has so many duties and so much to do, should come here.”

<!-- @segment dn21:1.9.4 -->

“For a long time I’ve wanted to come and see the Buddha, but I wasn’t able, being prevented by my many duties and responsibilities for the gods of the thirty-three.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.9.5 -->

This one time, sir, the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the <i lang='pi' translate='no'>salaḷa</i> tree hut.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.9.6 -->

Then I went to Sāvatthī to see the Buddha.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.10.1 -->

But at that time the Buddha was sitting immersed in some kind of meditation. And a divine maiden of Great King Vessavaṇa named Bhūjati was attending on the Buddha, standing there paying homage to him with cupped palms.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.10.2 -->

So I said to her,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.10.3 -->

‘Sister, please bow to the Buddha for me, saying:

<!-- @segment dn21:1.10.4 -->

“Sir, Sakka, lord of gods, with his ministers and retinue, bows with his head at your feet.”’

<!-- @segment dn21:1.10.5 -->

When I said this, she said to me,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.10.6 -->

‘It’s the wrong time to see the Buddha,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.10.7 -->

as he’s in retreat.’

<!-- @segment dn21:1.10.8 -->

‘Well then, sister, please convey my message when the Buddha emerges from that immersion.’

<!-- @segment dn21:1.10.9 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:1.10.10 -->

I hope that sister bowed to you?

<!-- @segment dn21:1.10.11 -->

Do you remember what she said?”

<!-- @segment dn21:1.10.12 -->

“She did bow, lord of gods, and I remember what she said.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.10.13 -->

I also remember that it was the sound of your chariot wheels that pulled me out of that immersion.”

<!-- @segment dn21:1.11.1 -->

“Sir, I have heard and learned this in the presence of the gods who were reborn in the host of the thirty-three before me:

<!-- @segment dn21:1.11.2 -->

‘When a Realized One arises in the world, perfected and fully awakened, the heavenly hosts swell, while the titan hosts dwindle.’

<!-- @segment dn21:1.11.3 -->

And I have seen this with my own eyes.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.11.4.0 -->

2.1. The Story of Gopikā

<!-- @segment dn21:1.11.5 -->

Right here in Kapilavatthu there was a Sakyan lady named Gopikā who had confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and had fulfilled her ethics.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.11.6 -->

Losing her attachment to femininity, she developed masculinity. When her body broke up, after death, she was reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.11.7 -->

In the company of the gods of the thirty-three she became one of my sons.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.11.8 -->

There they knew him as

<!-- @segment dn21:1.11.9 -->

the godling Gopaka.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.11.10 -->

Meanwhile three others, mendicants who had led the spiritual life under the Buddha, were reborn in the inferior centaur realm.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.11.11 -->

There they amused themselves, supplied and provided with the five kinds of sensual stimulation, and became my servants and attendants.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.11.12 -->

At that, Gopaka scolded them,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.11.13 -->

‘Where on earth were you at, good fellows, when you heard the Buddha’s teaching!

<!-- @segment dn21:1.11.14 -->

For while I was still a woman I had confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and had fulfilled my ethics. I lost my attachment to femininity and developed masculinity. When my body broke up, after death, I was reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. In the company of the gods of the thirty-three I became one of Sakka’s sons.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.11.15 -->

Here they know me as

<!-- @segment dn21:1.11.16 -->

the godling Gopaka.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.11.17 -->

But you, having led the spiritual life under the Buddha, were reborn in the inferior centaur realm.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.11.18 -->

It is a sad sight indeed to see fellow practitioners reborn in the inferior centaur realm.’

<!-- @segment dn21:1.11.19 -->

When scolded by Gopaka, two of those gods regained their memory right away. They went to the host of the priests of Divinity, but one god remained attached to sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.1 -->

‘“I was a laywoman disciple of the Clear-eyed One,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.2 -->

and my name was Gopikā.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.3 -->

I was devoted to the Buddha and the teaching,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.4 -->

and I faithfully served the Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.5 -->

Because of the clear rightness of the Buddha’s teaching,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.6 -->

I’m now a mighty, dazzling son of Sakka,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.7 -->

reborn in the Third Heaven.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.8 -->

And here they know me as Gopaka.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.9 -->

Then I saw some mendicants who I’d seen before,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.10 -->

dwelling in the host of centaurs.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.11 -->

They were disciples of Gotama

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.12 -->

when I used to be a human.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.13 -->

I served them with food and drink,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.14 -->

and clasped their feet in my own home.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.15 -->

Where on earth were these good fellows at

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.16 -->

when they learned the Buddha’s teachings?

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.17 -->

For each must know for themselves the teaching

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.18 -->

so well-taught, realized by the Clear-eyed One.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.19 -->

I was one who followed you,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.20 -->

having heard the fine words of the noble ones.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.21 -->

I’m now a mighty, dazzling son of Sakka,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.22 -->

reborn in the Third Heaven.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.23 -->

But you followed the best of men,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.24 -->

and led the supreme spiritual life,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.25 -->

but still you’re born in this lesser realm,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.26 -->

a rebirth unbefitting.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.27 -->

It’s a sad sight I see, good fellows,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.28 -->

fellow practitioners in a lesser realm.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.29 -->

Reborn in the host of centaurs,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.30 -->

only to wait upon the gods.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.31 -->

Meanwhile, I dwelt in a house—

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.32 -->

but see my distinction now!

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.33 -->

Having been a woman now I’m a male god,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.34 -->

blessed with heavenly sensual pleasures.”

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.35 -->

Scolded by that disciple of Gotama,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.36 -->

comprehending Gopaka, <j>they were struck with urgency.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.37 -->

“Let’s strive, let’s try hard—

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.38 -->

we won’t serve others any more!”

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.39 -->

Two of them roused up energy,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.40 -->

recalling the Buddha’s instructions.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.41 -->

Right away they became dispassionate,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.42 -->

seeing the drawbacks in sensual pleasures.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.43 -->

The fetters and bonds of sensual pleasures—

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.44 -->

the ties of the Wicked One so hard to break—

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.45 -->

they burst them like a bull elephant his ropes,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.46 -->

and passed right over the thirty-three.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.47 -->

The gods with Indra and the Progenitor

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.48 -->

were all gathered in the Hall of Clear Right.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.49 -->

As they sat there, they passed over them,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.50 -->

the heroes desireless, practicing purity.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.51 -->

Seeing them, Vāsava was struck with urgency;

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.52 -->

the master of gods in the midst of the group said,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.53 -->

“These were born in the lesser centaur realm,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.54 -->

but now they pass us by!”

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.55 -->

Heeding the speech of one so moved,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.56 -->

Gopaka addressed Vāsava,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.57 -->

“There is a Buddha, a lord of men, in the world.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.58 -->

Known as the Sakyan Sage, <j>he’s mastered the senses.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.59 -->

Those sons of his lost their memory;

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.60 -->

but when scolded by me they gained it back.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.61 -->

Of the three, there is one who remains

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.62 -->

dwelling in the host of centaurs.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.63 -->

But two, recollecting the path to awakening,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.64 -->

serene, spurn even the gods.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.65 -->

Such is the explanation of the teaching here:

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.66 -->

not a single disciple doubts that.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.67 -->

We venerate the Buddha, the victor, lord of men,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.68 -->

who has crossed the flood and cut off doubt.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.69 -->

They attained distinction to the extent

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.70 -->

they understood the teaching here;

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.71 -->

two of them distinguished

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.72 -->

in the host of the priests of Divinity.”’

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.73 -->

We have come here, dear sir,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.74 -->

to realize this same teaching.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.75 -->

If the Buddha would give me a chance,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.12.76 -->

I would ask a question, dear sir.”

<!-- @segment dn21:1.13.1 -->

Then it occurred to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.13.2 -->

“For a long time now this spirit has led a pure life. Any question he asks me will be beneficial, not unbeneficial.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.13.3 -->

And he will quickly understand any answer I give to his question.”

<!-- @segment dn21:1.13.4 -->

So the Buddha addressed Sakka in verse:

<!-- @segment dn21:1.13.5 -->

“Ask me your question, Vāsava,

<!-- @segment dn21:1.13.6 -->

whatever you want.

<!-- @segment dn21:1.13.7 -->

I’ll solve each and every

<!-- @segment dn21:1.13.8 -->

question you have.”

<!-- @segment dn21:1.13.9 -->

The first recitation section is complete.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.1.1 -->

Having been granted an opportunity by the Buddha, Sakka asked the first question.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.1.2 -->

“Good fellow, what fetters bind the gods, humans, titans, dragons, centaurs—and any of the other diverse creatures—

<!-- @segment dn21:2.1.3 -->

so that, though they wish to be free of enmity, violence, hostility, and hate, they still have enmity, violence, hostility, and hate?”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.1.4 -->

Such was Sakka’s question to the Buddha.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.1.5 -->

And the Buddha answered him:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.1.6 -->

“Lord of gods, the fetters of jealousy and stinginess bind the gods, humans, titans, dragons, centaurs—and any of the other diverse creatures—

<!-- @segment dn21:2.1.7 -->

so that, though they wish to be free of enmity, violence, hostility, and hate, they still have enmity, violence, hostility, and hate.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.1.8 -->

Such was the Buddha’s answer to Sakka.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.1.9 -->

Delighted, Sakka approved and agreed with what the Buddha said, saying,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.1.10 -->

“That’s so true, Blessed One! That’s so true, Holy One!

<!-- @segment dn21:2.1.11 -->

Hearing the Buddha’s answer, I’ve gone beyond doubt and got rid of indecision.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.1 -->

And then, having approved and agreed with what the Buddha said, Sakka asked another question:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.2 -->

“But good fellow, what is the source, origin, birthplace, and inception of jealousy and stinginess?

<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.3 -->

When what exists is there jealousy and stinginess?

<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.4 -->

When what doesn’t exist is there no jealousy and stinginess?”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.5 -->

“The liked and the disliked, lord of gods, are the source of jealousy and stinginess.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.6 -->

When the liked and the disliked exist there is jealousy and stinginess.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.7 -->

When the liked and the disliked don’t exist there is no jealousy and stinginess.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.8 -->

“But good fellow, what is the source of what is liked and disliked?”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.9 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.10 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.11 -->

“Desire is the source of what is liked and disliked.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.12 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.13 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.14 -->

“But what is the source of desire?”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.15 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.16 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.17 -->

“Thought is the source of desire.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.18 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.19 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.20 -->

“But what is the source of thought?”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.21 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.22 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.23 -->

“Judgments driven by the proliferation of perceptions are the source of thoughts.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.24 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.2.25 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.1 -->

“But how does a mendicant fittingly practice for the cessation of judgments driven by the proliferation of perceptions?”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.2.0 -->

2.2. Meditation on Feelings

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.3 -->

“Lord of gods, there are two kinds of happiness, I say:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.4 -->

that which you should cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.5 -->

There are two kinds of sadness, I say:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.6 -->

that which you should cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.7 -->

There are two kinds of equanimity, I say:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.8 -->

that which you should cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.9 -->

Why did I say that there are two kinds of happiness?

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.10 -->

Well, should you know of a happiness:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.11 -->

‘When I cultivate this kind of happiness, unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.’ You should not cultivate that kind of happiness.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.12 -->

Whereas, should you know of a happiness:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.13 -->

‘When I cultivate this kind of happiness, unskillful qualities decline, and skillful qualities grow.’ You should cultivate that kind of happiness.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.14 -->

And that which is free of placing the mind and keeping it connected is better than that which still involves placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.15 -->

That’s why I said there are two kinds of happiness.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.16 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.17 -->

Why did I say that there are two kinds of sadness?

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.18 -->

Well, should you know of a sadness:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.19 -->

‘When I cultivate this kind of sadness, unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.’ You should not cultivate that kind of sadness.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.20 -->

Whereas, should you know of a sadness:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.21 -->

‘When I cultivate this kind of sadness, unskillful qualities decline, and skillful qualities grow.’ You should cultivate that kind of sadness.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.22 -->

And that which is free of placing the mind and keeping it connected is better than that which still involves placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.23 -->

That’s why I said there are two kinds of sadness.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.24 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.25 -->

Why did I say that there are two kinds of equanimity?

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.26 -->

Well, should you know of an equanimity:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.27 -->

‘When I cultivate this kind of equanimity, unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.’ You should not cultivate that kind of equanimity.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.28 -->

Whereas, should you know of an equanimity:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.29 -->

‘When I cultivate this kind of equanimity, unskillful qualities decline, and skillful qualities grow.’ You should cultivate that kind of equanimity.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.30 -->

And that which is free of placing the mind and keeping it connected is better than that which still involves placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.31 -->

That’s why I said there are two kinds of equanimity.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.32 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.33 -->

That’s how a mendicant fittingly practices for the cessation of judgments driven by the proliferation of perceptions.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.34 -->

Such was the Buddha’s answer to Sakka.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.35 -->

Delighted, Sakka approved and agreed with what the Buddha said, saying,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.36 -->

“That’s so true, Blessed One! That’s so true, Holy One!

<!-- @segment dn21:2.3.37 -->

Hearing the Buddha’s answer, I’ve gone beyond doubt and got rid of indecision.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.0 -->

2.3. Restraint in the Monastic Code

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.1 -->

And then Sakka asked another question:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.2 -->

“But good fellow, how does a mendicant practice for restraint in the monastic code?”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.3 -->

“Lord of gods, I say that there are two kinds of bodily behavior:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.4 -->

that which you should cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.5 -->

I say that there are two kinds of verbal behavior:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.6 -->

that which you should cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.7 -->

There are two kinds of search, I say:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.8 -->

that which you should cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.9 -->

Why did I say that there are two kinds of bodily behavior?

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.10 -->

Well, should you know of a bodily behavior:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.11 -->

‘When I cultivate this kind of bodily behavior, unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.’ You should not cultivate that kind of bodily conduct.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.12 -->

Whereas, should you know of a bodily behavior:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.13 -->

‘When I cultivate this kind of bodily behavior, unskillful qualities decline, and skillful qualities grow.’ You should cultivate that kind of bodily conduct.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.14 -->

That’s why I said there are two kinds of bodily behavior.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.15 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.16 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.17 -->

Why did I say that there are two kinds of verbal behavior?

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.18 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.19 -->

Well, should you know of a kind of verbal behavior that it causes unskillful qualities to grow while skillful qualities decline, you should not cultivate it.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.20 -->

Whereas, should you know of a kind of verbal behavior that it causes unskillful qualities to decline while skillful qualities grow, you should cultivate it.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.21 -->

That’s why I said there are two kinds of verbal behavior.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.22 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.23 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.24 -->

Why did I say that there are two kinds of search?

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.25 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.26 -->

Well, should you know of a kind of search that it causes unskillful qualities to grow while skillful qualities decline, you should not cultivate it.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.27 -->

Whereas, should you know of a kind of search that it causes unskillful qualities to decline while skillful qualities grow, you should cultivate it.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.28 -->

That’s why I said there are two kinds of search.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.29 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.30 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.31 -->

That’s how a mendicant practices for restraint in the monastic code.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.32 -->

Such was the Buddha’s answer to Sakka.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.33 -->

Delighted, Sakka approved and agreed with what the Buddha said, saying,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.34 -->

“That’s so true, Blessed One! That’s so true, Holy One!

<!-- @segment dn21:2.4.35 -->

Hearing the Buddha’s answer, I’ve gone beyond doubt and got rid of indecision.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.0 -->

2.4. Sense Restraint

<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.1 -->

And then Sakka asked another question:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.2 -->

“But good fellow, how does a mendicant practice for restraint of the sense faculties?”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.3 -->

“Lord of gods, I say that there are two kinds of sight known by the eye:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.4 -->

that which you should cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.5 -->

There are two kinds of sound known by the ear …

<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.7 -->

smells known by the nose …

<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.8 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.9 -->

tastes known by the tongue …

<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.10 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.11 -->

touches known by the body …

<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.12 -->



<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.13 -->

ideas known by the mind:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.14 -->

that which you should cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.15 -->

When the Buddha said this, Sakka said to him:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.16 -->

“Sir, this is how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha’s brief statement:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.17 -->

You should not cultivate the kind of sight known by the eye which causes unskillful qualities to grow while skillful qualities decline.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.18 -->

And you should cultivate the kind of sight known by the eye which causes unskillful qualities to decline while skillful qualities grow.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.19 -->

You should not cultivate the kind of sound,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.20 -->

smell,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.21 -->

taste,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.22 -->

touch,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.23 -->

or idea known by the mind which causes unskillful qualities to grow while skillful qualities decline.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.24 -->

And you should cultivate the kind of idea known by the mind which causes unskillful qualities to decline while skillful qualities grow.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.25 -->

Sir, that’s how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha’s brief statement.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.5.26 -->

Hearing the Buddha’s answer, I’ve gone beyond doubt and got rid of indecision.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.6.1 -->

And then Sakka asked another question:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.6.2 -->

“Good fellow, do all ascetics and brahmins have a single doctrine, ethics, desire, and attachment?”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.6.3 -->

“No, lord of gods, they do not.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.6.4 -->

“Why not?”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.6.5 -->

“The world has many and diverse elements.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.6.6 -->

Whatever element sentient beings insist on in this world of many and diverse elements, they obstinately stick to it, insisting that:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.6.7 -->

‘This is the only truth, anything else is futile.’

<!-- @segment dn21:2.6.8 -->

That’s why not all ascetics and brahmins have a single doctrine, ethics, desire, and attachment.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.6.9 -->

“Good fellow, have all ascetics and brahmins reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal?”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.6.10 -->

“No, lord of gods, they have not.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.6.11 -->

“Why not?”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.6.12 -->

“Those mendicants who are freed through the ending of craving have reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.6.13 -->

That’s why not all ascetics and brahmins have reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.6.14 -->

Such was the Buddha’s answer to Sakka.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.6.15 -->

Delighted, Sakka approved and agreed with what the Buddha said, saying,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.6.16 -->

“That’s so true, Blessed One! That’s so true, Holy One!

<!-- @segment dn21:2.6.17 -->

Hearing the Buddha’s answer, I’ve gone beyond doubt and got rid of indecision.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.6.18 -->

And then Sakka, having approved and agreed with what the Buddha said, said to him,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.1 -->

“Turbulence, sir, is a disease, a boil, a dart. Turbulence drags a person to be regenerated in one state of existence or another.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.2 -->

That’s why a person finds themselves in states high and low.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.3 -->

Elsewhere, among other ascetics and brahmins, I wasn’t even given a chance to ask these questions that the Buddha has answered.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.4 -->

The dart of doubt and indecision has lain within me for a long time, but the Buddha has plucked it out.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.5 -->

“Lord of gods, do you recall having asked this question of other ascetics and brahmins?”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.6 -->

“I do, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.7 -->

“If you wouldn’t mind, lord of gods, tell me how they answered.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.8 -->

“It’s no trouble when someone such as the Blessed One is sitting here.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.9 -->

“Well, speak then, lord of gods.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.10 -->

“Sir, I approached those who I imagined were ascetics and brahmins living in the wilderness, in remote lodgings. But they were stumped by my question, and they even questioned me in return:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.11 -->

‘What is the venerable’s name?’

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.12 -->

So I answered them:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.13 -->

‘Good fellow, I am Sakka, lord of gods.’

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.14 -->

So they asked me another question:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.15 -->

‘But lord of gods, what deed brought you to this position?’

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.16 -->

So I taught them the Dhamma as I had learned and memorized it.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.17 -->

And they were pleased with just that much:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.18 -->

‘We have seen Sakka, lord of gods! And he answered our questions!’

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.19 -->

Invariably, they become my disciples, I don’t become theirs.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.20 -->

But sir, I am the Buddha’s disciple, a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, assured, destined for awakening.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.21.0 -->

2.5. On Feeling Happy

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.22 -->

“Lord of gods, do you recall ever feeling such joy and happiness before?”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.23 -->

“I do, sir.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.24 -->

“But how?”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.25 -->

“Once upon a time, sir, a battle was fought between the gods and the titans.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.26 -->

In that battle the gods won and the titans lost.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.27 -->

It occurred to me as victor,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.28 -->

‘Now the gods shall enjoy both the nectar of the gods and the nectar of the titans.’

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.29 -->

But sir, that joy and happiness is in the sphere of the rod and the sword. It doesn’t lead to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.7.30 -->

But the joy and happiness I feel listening to the Buddha’s teaching is not in the sphere of the rod and the sword. It does lead to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.1 -->

“But lord of gods, what reason do you see for speaking of such joy and happiness?”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.2 -->

“I see six reasons to speak of such joy and happiness, sir.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.3 -->

While staying right here,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.4 -->

remaining in the godly form,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.5 -->

I have gained an extended life:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.6 -->

know this, dear sir.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.7 -->

This is the first reason.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.8 -->

When I fall from the heavenly host,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.9 -->

leaving behind the non-human life,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.10 -->

I shall consciously go to a new womb,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.11 -->

wherever my mind delights.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.12 -->

This is the second reason.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.13 -->

Living happily under the guidance

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.14 -->

of the one of unclouded wisdom,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.15 -->

I shall practice systematically,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.16 -->

aware and mindful.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.17 -->

This is the third reason.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.18 -->

And if awakening should arise

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.19 -->

as I practice systematically,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.20 -->

I shall live as one who understands,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.21 -->

and my end shall come right there.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.22 -->

This is the fourth reason.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.23 -->

When I fall from the human realm,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.24 -->

leaving behind the human life,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.25 -->

I shall become a god again,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.26 -->

supreme in the heaven realm.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.27 -->

This is the fifth reason.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.28 -->

They are the finest of gods,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.29 -->

the glorious Akaniṭṭhas.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.30 -->

So long as my final life goes on,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.31 -->

there my home will be.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.32 -->

This is the sixth reason.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.8.33 -->

Seeing these six reasons I speak of such joy and happiness.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.1 -->

My wishes unfulfilled,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.2 -->

doubting and indecisive,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.3 -->

I wandered for such a long time,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.4 -->

in search of the Realized One.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.5 -->

I imagined that ascetics

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.6 -->

living in seclusion

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.7 -->

must surely be awakened,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.8 -->

so I went to sit near them.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.9 -->

‘How is there success?

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.10 -->

How is there failure?’

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.11 -->

But they were stumped by such questions

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.12 -->

about the path and practice.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.13 -->

And when they found out that I

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.14 -->

was Sakka, come from the gods,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.15 -->

they questioned me instead about

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.16 -->

the deed that brought me to this state.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.17 -->

I taught them the Dhamma

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.18 -->

as I had learned it among men.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.19 -->

They were delighted with that, saying:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.20 -->

‘We’ve seen Vāsava!’

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.21 -->

Now since I’ve seen the Buddha,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.22 -->

who helps us overcome doubt,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.23 -->

today, free of fear,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.24 -->

I pay homage to the awakened one.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.25 -->

Destroyer of the dart of craving,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.26 -->

the Buddha is unrivaled.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.27 -->

I bow to the great hero,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.28 -->

the Buddha, Kinsman of the Sun.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.29 -->

In the same way that Divinity ought be revered

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.30 -->

by we gods, dear sir,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.31 -->

today we shall revere you—

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.32 -->

come, let us revere you ourselves!

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.33 -->

You alone are the Awakened!

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.34 -->

You are the Teacher supreme!

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.35 -->

In the world with its gods,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.9.36 -->

you have no rival.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.10.1 -->

Then Sakka addressed the centaur Pañcasikha,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.10.2 -->

“Dear Pañcasikha, you were very helpful to me, since you first charmed the Buddha,

<!-- @segment dn21:2.10.3 -->

after which I went to see him.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.10.4 -->

I shall appoint you to your father’s position—you shall be king of the centaurs. And I give you Bhaddā Suriyavaccasā, for she loves you very much.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.10.5 -->

Then Sakka, touching the ground with his hand, expressed this heartfelt sentiment three times:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.10.6 -->

“Homage to him, the blessed one, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha!

<!-- @segment dn21:2.10.7 -->

Homage to him, the blessed one, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha!

<!-- @segment dn21:2.10.8 -->

Homage to him, the blessed one, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha!”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.10.9 -->

And while this discourse was being spoken, the stainless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in Sakka, lord of gods:

<!-- @segment dn21:2.10.10 -->

“Everything that is liable to arise is liable to cease.”

<!-- @segment dn21:2.10.11 -->

And also for another 80,000 deities.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.10.12 -->

Such were the questions Sakka was invited to ask, and which were answered by the Buddha.

<!-- @segment dn21:2.10.13 -->

And that’s why the name of this discussion is “Sakka’s Questions”.
