---
slug: dn22
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: The Longer Discourse on Mindfulness Meditation
---

<!-- @segment dn22:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment dn22:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Kurus, near the Kuru town named Kammāsadamma.

<!-- @segment dn22:1.3 -->

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,

<!-- @segment dn22:1.4 -->

“Mendicants!”

<!-- @segment dn22:1.5 -->

“Venerable sir,” they replied.

<!-- @segment dn22:1.6 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment dn22:1.7 -->

“Mendicants, the four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to convergence. They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment.

<!-- @segment dn22:1.8 -->

What four?

<!-- @segment dn22:1.9 -->

It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment dn22:1.10 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment dn22:1.11 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of the mind—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment dn22:1.12 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment dn22:1.13 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:2.0.1 -->

1. Observing the Body

<!-- @segment dn22:2.0.2 -->

1.1. Mindfulness of Breathing

<!-- @segment dn22:2.1 -->

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of the body?

<!-- @segment dn22:2.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant—gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut—sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight, and brings mindfulness to the present.

<!-- @segment dn22:2.3 -->

Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out.

<!-- @segment dn22:2.4 -->

Breathing in heavily they know: ‘I’m breathing in heavily.’ Breathing out heavily they know: ‘I’m breathing out heavily.’

<!-- @segment dn22:2.5 -->

When breathing in lightly they know: ‘I’m breathing in lightly.’ Breathing out lightly they know: ‘I’m breathing out lightly.’

<!-- @segment dn22:2.6 -->

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing the whole body.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing the whole body.’

<!-- @segment dn22:2.7 -->

They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in stilling the physical process.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out stilling the physical process.’

<!-- @segment dn22:2.8 -->

It’s like a deft carpenter or carpenter’s apprentice. When making a deep cut they know: ‘I’m making a deep cut,’ and when making a shallow cut they know: ‘I’m making a shallow cut.’

<!-- @segment dn22:2.9 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:2.10 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:2.11 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally, externally, and both internally and externally.

<!-- @segment dn22:2.12 -->

With respect to the body, they meditate observing the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish.

<!-- @segment dn22:2.13 -->

Or mindfulness is established that the body exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment dn22:2.14 -->

That’s how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body.

<!-- @segment dn22:2.15 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:3.0 -->

1.2. The Postures

<!-- @segment dn22:3.1 -->

Furthermore, when a mendicant is walking they know: ‘I am walking.’ When standing they know: ‘I am standing.’ When sitting they know: ‘I am sitting.’ And when lying down they know: ‘I am lying down.’

<!-- @segment dn22:3.2 -->

Whatever posture their body is in, they know it.

<!-- @segment dn22:3.3 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally, externally, and both internally and externally.

<!-- @segment dn22:3.4 -->

They meditate observing , with respect to the body, the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish.

<!-- @segment dn22:3.5 -->

Or mindfulness is established that the body exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment dn22:3.6 -->

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body.

<!-- @segment dn22:3.7 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:4.0 -->

1.3. Situational Awareness

<!-- @segment dn22:4.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant acts with situational awareness when going out and coming back; when looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when bearing the outer robe, bowl, and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent.

<!-- @segment dn22:4.2 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally …

<!-- @segment dn22:4.3 -->

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body.

<!-- @segment dn22:4.4 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:5.0 -->

1.4. Focusing on the Repulsive

<!-- @segment dn22:5.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant examines their own body, up from the soles of the feet and down from the tips of the hairs, wrapped in skin and full of many kinds of filth.

<!-- @segment dn22:5.2 -->

‘In this body there is head hair, body hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, undigested food, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva, snot, synovial fluid, urine.’

<!-- @segment dn22:5.3 -->

It’s as if there were a bag with openings at both ends, filled with various kinds of grains, such as fine rice, wheat, mung beans, peas, sesame, and ordinary rice. And a person with clear eyes were to open it and examine the contents: ‘These grains are fine rice, these are wheat, these are mung beans, these are peas, these are sesame, and these are ordinary rice.’

<!-- @segment dn22:5.4 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:5.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:5.6 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally …

<!-- @segment dn22:5.7 -->

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body.

<!-- @segment dn22:5.8 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:6.0 -->

1.5. Focusing on the Elements

<!-- @segment dn22:6.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant examines their own body, whatever its placement or posture, according to the elements:

<!-- @segment dn22:6.2 -->

‘In this body there is the earth element, the water element, the fire element, and the air element.’

<!-- @segment dn22:6.3 -->

It’s as if a deft butcher or butcher’s apprentice were to kill a cow and sit down at the crossroads with the meat cut into chops.

<!-- @segment dn22:6.4 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:6.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:6.6 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally …

<!-- @segment dn22:6.7 -->

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body.

<!-- @segment dn22:6.8 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:7.0 -->

1.6. The Charnel Ground Contemplations

<!-- @segment dn22:7.1 -->

Furthermore, suppose a mendicant were to see a corpse discarded in a charnel ground. And it had been dead for one, two, or three days, bloated, livid, and festering.

<!-- @segment dn22:7.2 -->

They’d compare it with their own body:

<!-- @segment dn22:7.3 -->

‘This body is also of that same nature, that same kind, and cannot go beyond that.’

<!-- @segment dn22:7.4 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally …

<!-- @segment dn22:7.5 -->

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body.

<!-- @segment dn22:8.1 -->

Furthermore, suppose they were to see a corpse discarded in a charnel ground being devoured by crows, hawks, vultures, herons, hounds, tigers, leopards, jackals, and many kinds of little creatures.

<!-- @segment dn22:8.2 -->

They’d compare it with their own body:

<!-- @segment dn22:8.3 -->

‘This body is also of that same nature, that same kind, and cannot go beyond that.’

<!-- @segment dn22:8.4 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally …

<!-- @segment dn22:8.5 -->

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body.

<!-- @segment dn22:9.1 -->

Furthermore, suppose they were to see a corpse discarded in a charnel ground, a skeleton with flesh and blood, held together by sinews …

<!-- @segment dn22:9.2 -->

A skeleton without flesh but smeared with blood, and held together by sinews …

<!-- @segment dn22:9.3 -->

A skeleton rid of flesh and blood, held together by sinews …

<!-- @segment dn22:9.4 -->

Bones rid of sinews, scattered in every direction. Here a hand-bone, there a foot-bone, here an ankle bone, there a shin-bone, here a thigh-bone, there a hip-bone, here a rib-bone, there a back-bone, here an arm-bone, there a neck-bone, here a jaw-bone, there a tooth, here the skull. …

<!-- @segment dn22:9.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:9.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:9.7 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:9.8 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:10.1 -->

White bones, the color of shells …

<!-- @segment dn22:10.2 -->

Decrepit bones, heaped in a pile …

<!-- @segment dn22:10.3 -->

Bones rotted and crumbled to powder.

<!-- @segment dn22:10.4 -->

They’d compare it with their own body:

<!-- @segment dn22:10.5 -->

‘This body is also of that same nature, that same kind, and cannot go beyond that.’

<!-- @segment dn22:10.6 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally, externally, and both internally and externally.

<!-- @segment dn22:10.7 -->

With respect to the body, they meditate observing the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish.

<!-- @segment dn22:10.8 -->

Or mindfulness is established that the body exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment dn22:10.9 -->

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body.

<!-- @segment dn22:10.10 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:10.11 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:11.0 -->

2. Observing the Feelings

<!-- @segment dn22:11.1 -->

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of feelings?

<!-- @segment dn22:11.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant who feels a pleasant feeling knows: ‘I feel a pleasant feeling.’

<!-- @segment dn22:11.3 -->

When they feel a painful feeling, they know: ‘I feel a painful feeling.’

<!-- @segment dn22:11.4 -->

When they feel a neutral feeling, they know: ‘I feel a neutral feeling.’

<!-- @segment dn22:11.5 -->

When they feel a pleasant feeling of the flesh, they know: ‘I feel a pleasant feeling of the flesh.’

<!-- @segment dn22:11.6 -->

When they feel a pleasant feeling not of the flesh, they know: ‘I feel a pleasant feeling not of the flesh.’

<!-- @segment dn22:11.7 -->

When they feel a painful feeling of the flesh, they know: ‘I feel a painful feeling of the flesh.’

<!-- @segment dn22:11.8 -->

When they feel a painful feeling not of the flesh, they know: ‘I feel a painful feeling not of the flesh.’

<!-- @segment dn22:11.9 -->

When they feel a neutral feeling of the flesh, they know: ‘I feel a neutral feeling of the flesh.’

<!-- @segment dn22:11.10 -->

When they feel a neutral feeling not of the flesh, they know: ‘I feel a neutral feeling not of the flesh.’

<!-- @segment dn22:11.11 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of feelings internally, externally, and both internally and externally.

<!-- @segment dn22:11.12 -->

With respect to feelings, they meditate observing the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish.

<!-- @segment dn22:11.13 -->

Or mindfulness is established that feelings exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment dn22:11.14 -->

That’s how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of feelings.

<!-- @segment dn22:11.15 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:12.0 -->

3. Observing the Mind

<!-- @segment dn22:12.1 -->

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of the mind?

<!-- @segment dn22:12.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant understands mind with greed as ‘mind with greed,’

<!-- @segment dn22:12.3 -->

and mind without greed as ‘mind without greed.’

<!-- @segment dn22:12.4 -->

They understand mind with hate as ‘mind with hate,’

<!-- @segment dn22:12.5 -->

and mind without hate as ‘mind without hate.’

<!-- @segment dn22:12.6 -->

They understand mind with delusion as ‘mind with delusion,’

<!-- @segment dn22:12.7 -->

and mind without delusion as ‘mind without delusion.’

<!-- @segment dn22:12.8 -->

They know constricted mind as ‘constricted mind,’

<!-- @segment dn22:12.9 -->

and scattered mind as ‘scattered mind.’

<!-- @segment dn22:12.10 -->

They know expansive mind as ‘expansive mind,’

<!-- @segment dn22:12.11 -->

and unexpansive mind as ‘unexpansive mind.’

<!-- @segment dn22:12.12 -->

They know mind that is not supreme as ‘mind that is not supreme,’

<!-- @segment dn22:12.13 -->

and mind that is supreme as ‘mind that is supreme.’

<!-- @segment dn22:12.14 -->

They know mind immersed in samādhi as ‘mind immersed in samādhi,’

<!-- @segment dn22:12.15 -->

and mind not immersed in samādhi as ‘mind not immersed in samādhi.’

<!-- @segment dn22:12.16 -->

They know freed mind as ‘freed mind,’

<!-- @segment dn22:12.17 -->

and unfreed mind as ‘unfreed mind.’

<!-- @segment dn22:12.18 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the mind internally, externally, and both internally and externally.

<!-- @segment dn22:12.19 -->

With respect to the mind, they meditate observing the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish.

<!-- @segment dn22:12.20 -->

Or mindfulness is established that the mind exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment dn22:12.21 -->

That’s how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the mind.

<!-- @segment dn22:12.22 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:13.0.1 -->

4. Observing Principles

<!-- @segment dn22:13.0.2 -->

4.1. The Hindrances

<!-- @segment dn22:13.1 -->

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of principles?

<!-- @segment dn22:13.2 -->

It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles with respect to the five hindrances.

<!-- @segment dn22:13.3 -->

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to the five hindrances?

<!-- @segment dn22:13.4 -->

It’s when a mendicant who has sensual desire in them understands: ‘I have sensual desire in me.’ When they don’t have sensual desire in them, they understand: ‘I don’t have sensual desire in me.’ They understand how sensual desire arises; how, when it’s already arisen, it’s given up; and how, once it’s given up, it doesn’t arise again in the future.

<!-- @segment dn22:13.5 -->

When they have ill will in them, they understand: ‘I have ill will in me.’ When they don’t have ill will in them, they understand: ‘I don’t have ill will in me.’ They understand how ill will arises; how, when it’s already arisen, it’s given up; and how, once it’s given up, it doesn’t arise again in the future.

<!-- @segment dn22:13.6 -->

When they have dullness and drowsiness in them, they understand: ‘I have dullness and drowsiness in me.’ When they don’t have dullness and drowsiness in them, they understand: ‘I don’t have dullness and drowsiness in me.’ They understand how dullness and drowsiness arise; how, when they’ve already arisen, they’re given up; and how, once they’re given up, they don’t arise again in the future.

<!-- @segment dn22:13.7 -->

When they have restlessness and remorse in them, they understand: ‘I have restlessness and remorse in me.’ When they don’t have restlessness and remorse in them, they understand: ‘I don’t have restlessness and remorse in me.’ They understand how restlessness and remorse arise; how, when they’ve already arisen, they’re given up; and how, once they’re given up, they don’t arise again in the future.

<!-- @segment dn22:13.8 -->

When they have doubt in them, they understand: ‘I have doubt in me.’ When they don’t have doubt in them, they understand: ‘I don’t have doubt in me.’ They understand how doubt arises; how, when it’s already arisen, it’s given up; and how, once it’s given up, it doesn’t arise again in the future.

<!-- @segment dn22:13.9 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally, externally, and both internally and externally.

<!-- @segment dn22:13.10 -->

They meditate observing the principles as liable to originate, as liable to fall, and as liable to both originate and vanish.

<!-- @segment dn22:13.11 -->

Or mindfulness is established that principles exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment dn22:13.12 -->

That’s how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles with respect to the five hindrances.

<!-- @segment dn22:13.13 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:14.0 -->

4.2. The Aggregates

<!-- @segment dn22:14.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles with respect to the five grasping aggregates.

<!-- @segment dn22:14.2 -->

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to the five grasping aggregates?

<!-- @segment dn22:14.3 -->

It’s when a mendicant contemplates:

<!-- @segment dn22:14.4 -->

Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form.

<!-- @segment dn22:14.5 -->

Such is feeling, such is the origin of feeling, such is the ending of feeling.

<!-- @segment dn22:14.6 -->

Such is perception, such is the origin of perception, such is the ending of perception.

<!-- @segment dn22:14.7 -->

Such are choices, such is the origin of choices, such is the ending of choices.

<!-- @segment dn22:14.8 -->

Such is consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness.’

<!-- @segment dn22:14.9 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally …

<!-- @segment dn22:14.10 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:14.11 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:14.12 -->

That’s how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles with respect to the five grasping aggregates.

<!-- @segment dn22:14.13 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:15.0 -->

4.3. The Sense Fields

<!-- @segment dn22:15.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles with respect to the six interior and exterior sense fields.

<!-- @segment dn22:15.2 -->

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to the six interior and exterior sense fields?

<!-- @segment dn22:15.3 -->

It’s when a mendicant understands the eye, sights, and the fetter that arises dependent on both of these. They understand how the fetter that has not arisen comes to arise; how the arisen fetter comes to be abandoned; and how the abandoned fetter comes to not rise again in the future.

<!-- @segment dn22:15.4 -->

They understand the ear, sounds, and the fetter …

<!-- @segment dn22:15.5 -->

They understand the nose, smells, and the fetter …

<!-- @segment dn22:15.6 -->

They understand the tongue, tastes, and the fetter …

<!-- @segment dn22:15.7 -->

They understand the body, touches, and the fetter …

<!-- @segment dn22:15.8 -->

They understand the mind, ideas, and the fetter that arises dependent on both of these. They understand how the fetter that has not arisen comes to arise; how the arisen fetter comes to be abandoned; and how the abandoned fetter comes to not rise again in the future.

<!-- @segment dn22:15.9 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally …

<!-- @segment dn22:15.10 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:15.11 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:15.12 -->

That’s how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles with respect to the six interior and exterior sense fields.

<!-- @segment dn22:15.13 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:16.0 -->

4.4. The Awakening Factors

<!-- @segment dn22:16.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles with respect to the seven awakening factors.

<!-- @segment dn22:16.2 -->

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to the seven awakening factors?

<!-- @segment dn22:16.3 -->

It’s when a mendicant who has the awakening factor of mindfulness in them understands: ‘I have the awakening factor of mindfulness in me.’ When they don’t have the awakening factor of mindfulness in them, they understand: ‘I don’t have the awakening factor of mindfulness in me.’ They understand how the awakening factor of mindfulness that has not arisen comes to arise; and how the awakening factor of mindfulness that has arisen becomes fulfilled by development.

<!-- @segment dn22:16.4 -->

When they have the awakening factor of investigation of principles …

<!-- @segment dn22:16.5 -->

energy …

<!-- @segment dn22:16.6 -->

rapture …

<!-- @segment dn22:16.7 -->

tranquility …

<!-- @segment dn22:16.8 -->

immersion …

<!-- @segment dn22:16.9 -->

equanimity in them, they understand: ‘I have the awakening factor of equanimity in me.’ When they don’t have the awakening factor of equanimity in them, they understand: ‘I don’t have the awakening factor of equanimity in me.’ They understand how the awakening factor of equanimity that has not arisen comes to arise; and how the awakening factor of equanimity that has arisen becomes fulfilled by development.

<!-- @segment dn22:16.10 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally, externally, and both internally and externally.

<!-- @segment dn22:16.11 -->

They meditate observing, with respect to the principles, the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish.

<!-- @segment dn22:16.12 -->

Or mindfulness is established that principles exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment dn22:16.13 -->

That’s how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles with respect to the seven awakening factors.

<!-- @segment dn22:16.14 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:17.0 -->

4.5. The Truths

<!-- @segment dn22:17.1 -->

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles with respect to the four noble truths.

<!-- @segment dn22:17.2 -->

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to the four noble truths?

<!-- @segment dn22:17.3 -->

It’s when a mendicant truly understands: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.’

<!-- @segment dn22:17.4 -->

The first recitation section is complete.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.0 -->

4.5.1. The Truth of Suffering

<!-- @segment dn22:18.1 -->

And what is the noble truth of suffering?

<!-- @segment dn22:18.2 -->

Rebirth is suffering; old age is suffering; death is suffering; sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are suffering; being coupled with the disliked is suffering; separation from the liked is suffering; not getting what you wish for is suffering. In brief, the five grasping aggregates are suffering.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.3 -->

And what is rebirth?

<!-- @segment dn22:18.4 -->

The rebirth, inception, conception, regeneration, manifestation of the sets of phenomena, and acquisition of the sense fields of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.5 -->

This is called rebirth.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.6 -->

And what is old age?

<!-- @segment dn22:18.7 -->

The old age, decrepitude, broken teeth, grey hair, wrinkly skin, diminished vitality, and failing faculties of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.8 -->

This is called old age.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.9 -->

And what is death?

<!-- @segment dn22:18.10 -->

The passing away, passing on, disintegration, demise, mortality, death, decease, breaking up of the aggregates, laying to rest of the corpse, and cutting off of the life faculty of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.11 -->

This is called death.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.12 -->

And what is sorrow?

<!-- @segment dn22:18.13 -->

The sorrow, sorrowing, state of sorrow, inner sorrow, inner deep sorrow in someone who has undergone misfortune, who has experienced suffering.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.14 -->

This is called sorrow.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.15 -->

And what is lamentation?

<!-- @segment dn22:18.16 -->

The wail, lament, wailing, lamenting, state of wailing and lamentation in someone who has undergone misfortune, who has experienced suffering.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.17 -->

This is called lamentation.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.18 -->

And what is pain?

<!-- @segment dn22:18.19 -->

Physical pain, physical unpleasantness, the painful, unpleasant feeling that’s born from physical contact.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.20 -->

This is called pain.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.21 -->

And what is sadness?

<!-- @segment dn22:18.22 -->

Mental pain, mental displeasure, the painful, unpleasant feeling that’s born from mental contact.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.23 -->

This is called sadness.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.24 -->

And what is distress?

<!-- @segment dn22:18.25 -->

The stress, distress, state of stress and distress in someone who has undergone misfortune, who has experienced suffering.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.26 -->

This is called distress.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.27 -->

And what is meant by ‘being coupled with the disliked is suffering’?

<!-- @segment dn22:18.28 -->

There are sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas, which are unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable. And there are those who want to harm, injure, disturb, and threaten you. The coming together with these, the joining, inclusion, mixing with them:

<!-- @segment dn22:18.29 -->

this is what is meant by ‘being coupled with the disliked is suffering’.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.30 -->

And what is meant by ‘separation from the liked is suffering’?

<!-- @segment dn22:18.31 -->

There are sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas, which are likable, desirable, and agreeable. And there are those who want to help, benefit, comfort, and protect you: mother and father, brother and sister, friends and colleagues, relatives and kin. The division from these, the disconnection, segregation, and parting from them:

<!-- @segment dn22:18.32 -->

this is what is meant by ‘separation from the liked is suffering’.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.33 -->

And what is meant by ‘not getting what you wish for is suffering’?

<!-- @segment dn22:18.34 -->

In sentient beings who are liable to be reborn, such a wish arises:

<!-- @segment dn22:18.35 -->

‘Oh, if only we were not liable to be reborn! If only rebirth would not come to us!’

<!-- @segment dn22:18.36 -->

But you can’t get that by wishing.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.37 -->

This is what is meant by ‘not getting what you wish for is suffering.’

<!-- @segment dn22:18.38 -->

In sentient beings who are liable to grow old …

<!-- @segment dn22:18.39 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:18.40 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:18.41 -->

fall ill …

<!-- @segment dn22:18.42 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:18.43 -->

die …

<!-- @segment dn22:18.44 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:18.45 -->

experience sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress, such a wish arises: ‘Oh, if only we were not liable to experience sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress! If only sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress would not come to us!’

<!-- @segment dn22:18.46 -->

But you can’t get that by wishing.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.47 -->

This is what is meant by ‘not getting what you wish for is suffering.’

<!-- @segment dn22:18.48 -->

And what is meant by ‘in brief, the five grasping aggregates are suffering’?

<!-- @segment dn22:18.49 -->

They are the grasping aggregates that consist of form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.50 -->

This is what is meant by ‘in brief, the five grasping aggregates are suffering’.

<!-- @segment dn22:18.51 -->

This is called the noble truth of suffering.

<!-- @segment dn22:19.0 -->

4.5.2. The Origin of Suffering

<!-- @segment dn22:19.1 -->

And what is the noble truth of the origin of suffering?

<!-- @segment dn22:19.2 -->

It’s the craving that leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure there wherever it alights. That is,

<!-- @segment dn22:19.3 -->

craving for sensual pleasures, craving for existence, and craving for nonexistence.

<!-- @segment dn22:19.4 -->

But where does that craving arise and where does it settle?

<!-- @segment dn22:19.5 -->

Whatever in the world seems nice and pleasant, it is there that craving arises and settles.

<!-- @segment dn22:19.6 -->

And what in the world seems nice and pleasant?

<!-- @segment dn22:19.7 -->

The eye in the world seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and settles.

<!-- @segment dn22:19.8 -->

The ear …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.9 -->

nose …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.10 -->

tongue …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.11 -->

body …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.12 -->

mind in the world seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and settles.

<!-- @segment dn22:19.13 -->

Sights …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.14 -->

sounds …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.15 -->

smells …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.16 -->

tastes …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.17 -->

touches …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.18 -->

ideas in the world seem nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and settles.

<!-- @segment dn22:19.19 -->

Eye consciousness …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.20 -->

ear consciousness …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.21 -->

nose consciousness …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.22 -->

tongue consciousness …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.23 -->

body consciousness …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.24 -->

mind consciousness in the world seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and settles.

<!-- @segment dn22:19.25 -->

Eye contact …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.26 -->

ear contact …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.27 -->

nose contact …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.28 -->

tongue contact …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.29 -->

body contact …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.30 -->

mind contact in the world seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and settles.

<!-- @segment dn22:19.31 -->

Feeling born of eye contact …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.32 -->

feeling born of ear contact …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.33 -->

feeling born of nose contact …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.34 -->

feeling born of tongue contact …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.35 -->

feeling born of body contact …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.36 -->

feeling born of mind contact in the world seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and settles.

<!-- @segment dn22:19.37 -->

Perception of sights …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.38 -->

perception of sounds …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.39 -->

perception of smells …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.40 -->

perception of tastes …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.41 -->

perception of touches …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.42 -->

perception of ideas in the world seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and settles.

<!-- @segment dn22:19.43 -->

Intention regarding sights …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.44 -->

intention regarding sounds …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.45 -->

intention regarding smells …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.46 -->

intention regarding tastes …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.47 -->

intention regarding touches …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.48 -->

intention regarding ideas in the world seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and settles.

<!-- @segment dn22:19.49 -->

Craving for sights …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.50 -->

craving for sounds …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.51 -->

craving for smells …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.52 -->

craving for tastes …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.53 -->

craving for touches …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.54 -->

craving for ideas in the world seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and settles.

<!-- @segment dn22:19.55 -->

Thoughts about sights …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.56 -->

thoughts about sounds …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.57 -->

thoughts about smells …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.58 -->

thoughts about tastes …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.59 -->

thoughts about touches …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.60 -->

thoughts about ideas in the world seem nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and settles.

<!-- @segment dn22:19.61 -->

Considerations regarding sights …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.62 -->

considerations regarding sounds …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.63 -->

considerations regarding smells …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.64 -->

considerations regarding tastes …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.65 -->

considerations regarding touches …

<!-- @segment dn22:19.66 -->

considerations regarding ideas in the world seem nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and settles.

<!-- @segment dn22:19.67 -->

This is called the noble truth of the origin of suffering.

<!-- @segment dn22:20.0 -->

4.5.3. The Cessation of Suffering

<!-- @segment dn22:20.1 -->

And what is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering?

<!-- @segment dn22:20.2 -->

It’s the fading away and cessation of that very same craving with no residue left behind; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not clinging to it.

<!-- @segment dn22:20.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.4 -->

Whatever in the world seems nice and pleasant, it is there that craving is given up and ceases.

<!-- @segment dn22:20.5 -->

And what in the world seems nice and pleasant?

<!-- @segment dn22:20.6 -->

The eye in the world seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving is given up and ceases. …

<!-- @segment dn22:20.7 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.8 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.9 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.10 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.11 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.12 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.13 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.14 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.15 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.16 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.17 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.18 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.19 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.20 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.21 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.22 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.23 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.24 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.25 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.26 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.27 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.28 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.29 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.30 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.31 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.32 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.33 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.34 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.35 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.36 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.37 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.38 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.39 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.40 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.41 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.42 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.43 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.44 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.45 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.46 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.47 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.48 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.49 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.50 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.51 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.52 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.53 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.54 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.55 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.56 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.57 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.58 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.59 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.60 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.61 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.62 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.63 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.64 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:20.65 -->

Considerations regarding ideas in the world seem nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving is given up and ceases.

<!-- @segment dn22:20.66 -->

This is called the noble truth of the cessation of suffering.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.0 -->

4.5.4. The Path

<!-- @segment dn22:21.1 -->

And what is the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering?

<!-- @segment dn22:21.2 -->

It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:

<!-- @segment dn22:21.3 -->

right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.4 -->

And what is right view?

<!-- @segment dn22:21.5 -->

Knowing about suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.6 -->

This is called right view.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.7 -->

And what is right purpose?

<!-- @segment dn22:21.8 -->

Purposes of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.9 -->

This is called right purpose.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.10 -->

And what is right speech?

<!-- @segment dn22:21.11 -->

Refraining from lying, backbiting, harsh speech, and talking nonsense.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.12 -->

This is called right speech.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.13 -->

And what is right action?

<!-- @segment dn22:21.14 -->

Refraining from killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.15 -->

This is called right action.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.16 -->

And what is right livelihood?

<!-- @segment dn22:21.17 -->

It’s when a noble disciple gives up wrong livelihood and earns a living by right livelihood.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.18 -->

This is called right livelihood.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.19 -->

And what is right effort?

<!-- @segment dn22:21.20 -->

It’s when a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.21 -->

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.22 -->

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.23 -->

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are completed by development.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.24 -->

This is called right effort.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.25 -->

And what is right mindfulness?

<!-- @segment dn22:21.26 -->

It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.27 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.28 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of the mind—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.29 -->

They meditate observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.30 -->

This is called right mindfulness.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.31 -->

And what is right immersion?

<!-- @segment dn22:21.32 -->

It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.33 -->

As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.34 -->

And with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’

<!-- @segment dn22:21.35 -->

With the giving up of pleasure and pain and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.36 -->

This is called right immersion.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.37 -->

This is called the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.38 -->

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally, externally, and both internally and externally.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.39 -->

They meditate observing, with respect to the principles, the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.40 -->

Or mindfulness is established that principles exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.41 -->

That’s how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles with respect to the four noble truths.

<!-- @segment dn22:21.42 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:21.43 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:22.1 -->

Anyone who develops these four kinds of mindfulness meditation in this way for seven years can expect one of two results:

<!-- @segment dn22:22.2 -->

enlightenment in this very life, or if there’s residue left behind, non-return.

<!-- @segment dn22:22.3 -->

Let alone seven years,

<!-- @segment dn22:22.4 -->

anyone who develops these four kinds of mindfulness meditation in this way for six years …

<!-- @segment dn22:22.5 -->

five years …

<!-- @segment dn22:22.6 -->

four years …

<!-- @segment dn22:22.7 -->

three years …

<!-- @segment dn22:22.8 -->

two years …

<!-- @segment dn22:22.9 -->

one year …

<!-- @segment dn22:22.10 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:22.11 -->

seven months …

<!-- @segment dn22:22.12 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:22.13 -->



<!-- @segment dn22:22.14 -->

six months …

<!-- @segment dn22:22.15 -->

five months …

<!-- @segment dn22:22.16 -->

four months …

<!-- @segment dn22:22.17 -->

three months …

<!-- @segment dn22:22.18 -->

two months …

<!-- @segment dn22:22.19 -->

one month …

<!-- @segment dn22:22.20 -->

a fortnight …

<!-- @segment dn22:22.21 -->

Let alone a fortnight,

<!-- @segment dn22:22.22 -->

anyone who develops these four kinds of mindfulness meditation in this way for seven days can expect one of two results:

<!-- @segment dn22:22.23 -->

enlightenment in this very life, or if there’s residue left behind, non-return.

<!-- @segment dn22:22.24 -->

‘The four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to convergence. They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment.’

<!-- @segment dn22:22.25 -->

That’s what I said, and this is why I said it.”

<!-- @segment dn22:22.26 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment dn22:22.27 -->

Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said.
