---
slug: dn24
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: About Pāṭikaputta
---

<!-- @segment dn24:1.0 -->

1. The Story of Sunakkhatta

<!-- @segment dn24:1.1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Mallas, near the Mallian town named Anupiya.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.1.3 -->

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Anupiya for alms.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.1.4 -->

Then it occurred to him,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.1.5 -->

“It’s too early to wander for alms in Anupiya.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.1.6 -->

Why don’t I go to visit the wanderer of the Bhaggava clan in his monastery?”

<!-- @segment dn24:1.2.1 -->

So that’s what he did.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.2.2 -->

Then the wanderer of the Bhaggava clan said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.2.3 -->

“Let the Blessed One come, sir!

<!-- @segment dn24:1.2.4 -->

Welcome to the Blessed One, sir!

<!-- @segment dn24:1.2.5 -->

It’s been a long time since you took the opportunity to come here.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.2.6 -->

Please, sir, sit down, here, a seat is ready.”

<!-- @segment dn24:1.2.7 -->

The Buddha sat on the seat spread out,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.2.8 -->

while the wanderer of the Bhaggava clan took a low seat, sat to one side,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.2.9 -->

and said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.2.10 -->

“Sir, a few days ago Sunakkhatta the Licchavi came to me and said:

<!-- @segment dn24:1.2.11 -->

‘Now, Bhaggava, I have disavowed the Buddha.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.2.12 -->

Now I no longer live dedicated to him.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.2.13 -->

Sir, is what Sunakkhatta said true?”

<!-- @segment dn24:1.2.14 -->

“Indeed it is, Bhaggava.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.3.1 -->

A few days ago Sunakkhatta the Licchavi came to me, bowed, sat down to one side, and said:

<!-- @segment dn24:1.3.2 -->

‘Now I disavow the Buddha!

<!-- @segment dn24:1.3.3 -->

Now I shall no longer live dedicated to you.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.3.4 -->

When Sunakkhatta said this, I said to him,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.3.5 -->

‘But Sunakkhatta, did I ever say to you:

<!-- @segment dn24:1.3.6 -->

“Come, live dedicated to me”?’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.3.7 -->

‘No, sir.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.3.8 -->

‘Or did you ever say to me:

<!-- @segment dn24:1.3.9 -->

“Sir, I shall live dedicated to the Buddha”?’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.3.10 -->

‘No, sir.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.3.11 -->

‘So it seems that I did not ask you to

<!-- @segment dn24:1.3.12 -->

live dedicated to me,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.3.13 -->

nor did you say you would

<!-- @segment dn24:1.3.14 -->

live dedicated to me.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.3.15 -->

In that case, you futile man, who are you and what do you want to disavow?

<!-- @segment dn24:1.3.16 -->

See how far you have strayed!’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.4.1 -->

‘But sir, the Buddha never performs any superhuman demonstrations of psychic power for me.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.4.2 -->

‘But Sunakkhatta, did I ever say to you:

<!-- @segment dn24:1.4.3 -->

“Come, live dedicated to me and I will perform a superhuman demonstration of psychic power for you”?’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.4.4 -->

‘No, sir.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.4.5 -->

‘Or did you ever say to me:

<!-- @segment dn24:1.4.6 -->

“Sir, I shall live dedicated to the Buddha, and the Buddha will perform a superhuman demonstration of psychic power for me”?’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.4.7 -->

‘No, sir.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.4.8 -->

‘So it seems that I did not ask this of you, and you did not require it of me.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.4.9 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.4.10 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.4.11 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.4.12 -->

In that case, you futile man, who are you and what do you want to disavow?

<!-- @segment dn24:1.4.13 -->

What do you think, Sunakkhatta?

<!-- @segment dn24:1.4.14 -->

Whether or not there is a demonstration of psychic power, does my teaching lead someone who practices it to the goal of the complete ending of suffering?’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.4.15 -->

‘It does, sir.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.4.16 -->

‘So it seems that whether or not there is a demonstration of psychic power, my teaching leads someone who practices it to the goal of the complete ending of suffering.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.4.17 -->

In that case, what is the point of superhuman demonstrations of psychic power?

<!-- @segment dn24:1.4.18 -->

See how far you have strayed, you silly man!’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.5.1 -->

‘But sir, the Buddha never describes the origin of the world to me.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.5.2 -->

‘But Sunakkhatta, did I ever say to you:

<!-- @segment dn24:1.5.3 -->

“Come, live dedicated to me and I will describe the origin of the world to you”?’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.5.4 -->

‘No, sir.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.5.5 -->

‘Or did you ever say to me:

<!-- @segment dn24:1.5.6 -->

“Sir, I shall live dedicated to the Buddha, and the Buddha will describe the origin of the world to me”?’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.5.7 -->

‘No, sir.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.5.8 -->

‘So it seems that I did not ask this of you, and you did not require it of me.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.5.9 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.5.10 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.5.11 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.5.12 -->

In that case, you futile man, who are you and what do you want to disavow?

<!-- @segment dn24:1.5.13 -->

What do you think, Sunakkhatta?

<!-- @segment dn24:1.5.14 -->

Whether or not the origin of the world is described, does my teaching lead someone who practices it to the goal of the complete ending of suffering?’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.5.15 -->

‘It does, sir.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.5.16 -->

‘So it seems that whether or not the origin of the world is described, my teaching leads someone who practices it to the goal of the complete ending of suffering.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.5.17 -->

In that case, what is the point of describing the origin of the world?

<!-- @segment dn24:1.5.18 -->

See how far you have strayed, you silly man!

<!-- @segment dn24:1.6.1 -->

In many ways, Sunakkhatta, you have praised me like this in the Vajjian capital:

<!-- @segment dn24:1.6.2 -->

“That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.”

<!-- @segment dn24:1.6.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.6.4 -->

In many ways you have praised the teaching like this in the Vajjian capital:

<!-- @segment dn24:1.6.5 -->

“The teaching is well explained by the Buddha—apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.”

<!-- @segment dn24:1.6.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.6.7 -->

In many ways you have praised the Saṅgha like this in the Vajjian capital:

<!-- @segment dn24:1.6.8 -->

“The Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples is practicing the way that’s good, direct, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight individual persons. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with cupped palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.”

<!-- @segment dn24:1.6.9 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.6.10 -->

I declare this to you, Sunakkhatta, I announce this to you!

<!-- @segment dn24:1.6.11 -->

There will be those who say that Sunakkhatta was unable to lead the spiritual life under the ascetic Gotama. That’s why he resigned the training and returned to a lesser life.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.6.12 -->

That’s what they’ll say.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.6.13 -->

Though I spoke to Sunakkhatta like this, he still left this teaching and training, like someone on the highway to hell.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.0 -->

2. On the Aristocrat of Kuru

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.1 -->

Bhaggava, this one time I was staying in the land of the Kurus where they have a town named Uttarakā.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.2 -->

Then I robed up in the morning and, taking my bowl and robe, entered Uttarakā for alms with Sunakkhatta the Licchavi as my second monk.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.3 -->

Now at that time a naked ascetic who was an aristocrat of Kuru had taken a vow to behave like a dog. When food is tossed on the ground, he gets down on all fours, eating and devouring it just with his mouth.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.4 -->

Sunakkhatta saw him doing this

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.5 -->

and thought,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.6 -->

‘That ascetic is a holy man!’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.7 -->

Then, knowing Sunakkhatta’s train of thought, I said to him,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.8 -->

‘Don’t you claim to be an ascetic who follows the Sakyan, you silly man?’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.9 -->

‘But why does the Buddha say this to me?’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.10 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.11 -->

‘When you saw that naked ascetic of Kuru, didn’t you think,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.12 -->

“That ascetic is a holy man!”?’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.13 -->

‘Yes, sir.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.14 -->

But sir, are you jealous of the perfected ones?’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.15 -->

‘I’m not jealous of the perfected ones, you silly man.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.16 -->

Rather, you should give up this harmful misconception that has arisen in you.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.17 -->

Don’t create lasting harm and suffering for yourself!

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.18 -->

That naked ascetic the aristocrat of Kuru, who you imagine to be a holy man, will die of flatulence in seven days.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.19 -->

And when he dies, he’ll be reborn in the very lowest rank of titans, named the Kālakañjas.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.20 -->

And they’ll throw him in the charnel ground on a clump of vetiver.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.21 -->

If you wish, Sunakkhatta, go to the aristocrat of Kuru and ask him

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.22 -->

whether he knows his own destiny.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.23 -->

It’s possible that he will answer:

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.24 -->

“Reverend Sunakkhatta, I know my own destiny.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.7.25 -->

I’ve been reborn in the very lowest rank of titans, named the Kālakañjas.”’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.8.1 -->

So, Bhaggava, Sunakkhatta went to see the aristocrat of Kuru and said to him,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.8.2 -->

‘Reverend aristocrat of Kuru, the ascetic Gotama has declared

<!-- @segment dn24:1.8.3 -->

that you will die of flatulence in seven days.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.8.4 -->

And when you die, you’ll be reborn in the very lowest rank of titans, named the Kālakañjas.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.8.5 -->

And when you die, they’ll throw you in the charnel ground on a clump of vetiver.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.8.6 -->

But by eating just a little food and drinking just a little water,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.8.7 -->

you’ll prove what the ascetic Gotama says to be false.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.8.8 -->

Then Sunakkhatta counted up the days until the seventh day, as happens when you have no faith in the Realized One.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.8.9 -->

But on the seventh day, the naked ascetic who was an aristocrat of Kuru died of flatulence.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.8.10 -->

And when he passed away, he was reborn in the very lowest rank of titans, named the Kālakañjas.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.8.11 -->

And when he passed away, they threw him in the charnel ground on a clump of vetiver.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.9.1 -->

Sunakkhatta the Licchavi heard about this.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.9.2 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.9.3 -->

So he went to see the aristocrat of Kuru in the charnel ground on the clump of vetiver. There he struck him with his fist three times,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.9.4 -->

‘Reverend aristocrat of Kuru, do you know your destiny?’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.9.5 -->

Then the aristocrat of Kuru got up, rubbing his back with his hands, and said,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.9.6 -->

‘Reverend Sunakkhatta, I know my own destiny.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.9.7 -->

I’ve been reborn in the very lowest rank of titans, named the Kālakañjas.’ After speaking, he fell flat right there.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.10.1 -->

Then Sunakkhatta came to me, bowed, and sat down to one side. I said to him,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.10.2 -->

‘What do you think, Sunakkhatta?

<!-- @segment dn24:1.10.3 -->

Did the prediction I made about the aristocrat of Kuru turn out to be correct, or not?’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.10.4 -->

‘It turned out to be correct.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.10.5 -->

‘What do you think, Sunakkhatta?

<!-- @segment dn24:1.10.6 -->

If that is so, has a superhuman demonstration of psychic power been performed or not?’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.10.7 -->

‘Clearly, sir, a superhuman demonstration of psychic power has been performed.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.10.8 -->

‘Though I performed such a superhuman demonstration of psychic power you say this:

<!-- @segment dn24:1.10.9 -->

“But sir, the Buddha never performs any superhuman demonstrations of psychic power for me.”

<!-- @segment dn24:1.10.10 -->

See how far you have strayed!’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.10.11 -->

Though I spoke to Sunakkhatta like this, he still left this teaching and training, like someone on the highway to hell.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.11.0 -->

3. On the Naked Ascetic Kaḷāramaṭṭaka

<!-- @segment dn24:1.11.1 -->

This one time, Bhaggava, I was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.11.2 -->

Now at that time the naked ascetic Kaḷāramaṭṭaka was residing in Vesālī. And in the Vajjian capital he had reached the peak of material things and fame.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.11.3 -->

He had undertaken these seven vows.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.11.4 -->

‘As long as I live, I will be a naked ascetic, not wearing clothes. As long as I live, I will be chaste, not having sex. As long as I live, I will consume only meat and beer, not eating rice and porridge.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.11.5 -->

And I will not go past the following shrines near Vesālī: the Udena Shrine to the east, the Gotamaka to the south, the Seven Maidens to the west, and the Many Sons to the north.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.11.6 -->

And it was due to undertaking these seven vows that he had reached the peak of material things and fame.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.12.1 -->

So, Bhaggava, Sunakkhatta went to see Kaḷāramaṭṭaka and asked him a question.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.12.2 -->

But when it stumped him,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.12.3 -->

he displayed annoyance, hate, and bitterness.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.12.4 -->

So Sunakkhatta thought,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.12.5 -->

‘I’ve offended the holy man, the perfected one, the ascetic.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.12.6 -->

I mustn’t create lasting harm and suffering for myself!’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.13.1 -->

Then Sunakkhatta came to me, bowed, and sat down to one side. I said to him,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.13.2 -->

‘Don’t you claim to be an ascetic who follows the Sakyan, you silly man?’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.13.3 -->

‘But why does the Buddha say this to me?’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.13.4 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.13.5 -->

‘Didn’t you go to see the naked ascetic Kaḷāramaṭṭaka and ask him a question?

<!-- @segment dn24:1.13.6 -->

But when it stumped him,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.13.7 -->

he displayed annoyance, hate, and bitterness.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.13.8 -->

Then you thought,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.13.9 -->

“I’ve offended the holy man, the perfected one, the ascetic.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.13.10 -->

I mustn’t create lasting harm and suffering for myself!”’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.13.11 -->

‘Yes, sir.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.13.12 -->

But sir, are you jealous of perfected ones?’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.13.13 -->

‘I’m not jealous of the perfected ones, you silly man.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.13.14 -->

Rather, you should give up this harmful misconception that has arisen in you.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.13.15 -->

Don’t create lasting harm and suffering for yourself!

<!-- @segment dn24:1.13.16 -->

That naked ascetic Kaḷāramaṭṭaka, who you imagine to be a true holy man,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.13.17 -->

will shortly be clothed, living with a partner, eating rice and porridge, having gone past all the shrines near Vesālī. And he will die after losing all his fame.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.13.18 -->

And that’s exactly what happened.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.14.1 -->

Sunakkhatta heard about this.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.14.2 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.14.3 -->

He came to me, bowed, and sat down to one side. I said to him,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.14.4 -->

‘What do you think, Sunakkhatta?

<!-- @segment dn24:1.14.5 -->

Did the declaration I made about Kaḷāramaṭṭaka turn out to be correct, or not?’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.14.6 -->

‘It turned out to be correct.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.14.7 -->

‘What do you think, Sunakkhatta?

<!-- @segment dn24:1.14.8 -->

If that is so, has a superhuman demonstration of psychic power been performed or not?’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.14.9 -->

‘Clearly, sir, a superhuman demonstration of psychic power has been performed.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.14.10 -->

‘Though I perform such a superhuman demonstration of psychic power you say this:

<!-- @segment dn24:1.14.11 -->

“But sir, the Buddha never performs any superhuman demonstrations of psychic power for me.”

<!-- @segment dn24:1.14.12 -->

See how far you have strayed!’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.14.13 -->

Though I spoke to Sunakkhatta like this, he still left this teaching and training, like someone on the highway to hell.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.15.0 -->

4. On the Naked Ascetic Pāṭikaputta

<!-- @segment dn24:1.15.1 -->

This one time, Bhaggava, I was staying right there near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.15.2 -->

Now at that time the naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta was residing in Vesālī. And in the Vajjian capital he had reached the peak of material things and fame.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.15.3 -->

He was telling a crowd in Vesālī:

<!-- @segment dn24:1.15.4 -->

‘Both the ascetic Gotama and I speak from knowledge.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.15.5 -->

One who speaks from knowledge ought to display a superhuman demonstration of psychic power to another who speaks from knowledge.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.15.6 -->

If the ascetic Gotama meets me half-way,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.15.7 -->

there we should both perform a superhuman demonstration of psychic power.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.15.8 -->

If he performs one demonstration of psychic power, I’ll perform two.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.15.9 -->

If he performs two, I’ll perform four.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.15.10 -->

If he performs four, I’ll perform eight.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.15.11 -->

However many demonstrations of psychic power the ascetic Gotama performs, I’ll perform double.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.16.1 -->

Then Sunakkhatta came to me, bowed, sat down to one side, and told me of all this.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.16.2 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.16.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.16.4 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.16.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.16.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.16.7 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.16.8 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.16.9 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.16.10 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.16.11 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.16.12 -->

I said to him,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.16.13 -->

‘Sunakkhatta, the naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta is not capable of meeting me face to face, unless he gives up that statement and that intention, and lets go of that view.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.16.14 -->

If he thinks he can

<!-- @segment dn24:1.16.15 -->

meet me face to face without giving up those things, his head may explode.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.17.1 -->

‘Careful what you say, Blessed One! Careful what you say, Holy One!’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.17.2 -->

‘But why do you say this to me, Sunakkhatta?’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.17.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.17.4 -->

‘Sir, the Buddha has categorically asserted that

<!-- @segment dn24:1.17.5 -->

Pāṭikaputta is not capable of meeting the Buddha face to face, otherwise

<!-- @segment dn24:1.17.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.17.7 -->

his head may explode.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.17.8 -->

But Pāṭikaputta might meet the Buddha face to face in disguise, proving the Buddha wrong.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.1 -->

‘Sunakkhatta, would the Realized One make an ambiguous statement?’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.2 -->

‘But sir, did you make that statement after encompassing Pāṭikaputta’s mind with your mind?

<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.4 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.6 -->

Or did deities tell you about it?’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.7 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.8 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.9 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.10 -->

‘Both, Sunakkhatta.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.11 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.12 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.13 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.14 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.15 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.16 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.17 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.18 -->

For Ajita the Licchavi general has recently passed away and been reborn in the host of the thirty-three.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.19 -->

He came and told me this,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.20 -->

“The naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta is shameless, sir,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.21 -->

he is a liar.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.22 -->

For he has declared of me in the Vajjian capital:

<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.23 -->

‘Ajita the Licchavi general has been reborn in the Great Hell.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.24 -->

But that is not true—

<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.25 -->

I have been reborn in the host of the thirty-three.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.26 -->

The naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta is shameless, sir,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.27 -->

he is a liar.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.28 -->

Pāṭikaputta is not capable of meeting the Buddha face to face, otherwise

<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.29 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.30 -->

his head may explode.”

<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.31 -->

Thus I both made that statement after encompassing Pāṭikaputta’s mind with my mind,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.32 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.33 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.34 -->

and deities told me about it.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.35 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.36 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.37 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.38 -->

So Sunakkhatta, I’ll wander for alms in Vesālī. After the meal, on my return from almsround, I’ll go to Pāṭikaputta’s monastery for the day’s meditation.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.18.39 -->

Now you may tell him, if you so wish.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.19.0 -->

5. On Demonstrations of Psychic Power

<!-- @segment dn24:1.19.1 -->

Then, Bhaggava, I robed up in the morning and, taking my bowl and robe, entered Vesālī for alms.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.19.2 -->

After the meal, on my return from almsround, I went to Pāṭikaputta’s monastery for the day’s meditation.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.19.3 -->

Then Sunakkhatta rushed into Vesālī to see the very well-known Licchavis and said to them,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.19.4 -->

‘Respectable sirs, after his almsround, the Buddha has gone to Pāṭikaputta’s monastery for the day’s meditation.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.19.5 -->

Come forth, good sirs, come forth! There will be a superhuman demonstration of psychic power by the holy ascetics!’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.19.6 -->

So the very well-known Licchavis thought,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.19.7 -->

‘It seems there will be a superhuman demonstration of psychic power by the holy ascetics!

<!-- @segment dn24:1.19.8 -->

Let’s go!’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.19.9 -->

Then he went to see the very well-known well-to-do brahmins, rich householders, and ascetics and brahmins who follow various other religions, and said the same thing.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.19.10 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.19.11 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.19.12 -->

They all said,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.19.13 -->

‘It seems there will be a superhuman demonstration of psychic power by the holy ascetics!

<!-- @segment dn24:1.19.14 -->

Let’s go!’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.19.15 -->

Then all those very well-known people went to Pāṭikaputta’s monastery.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.19.16 -->

That assembly was large, Bhaggava; there were many hundreds, many thousands of them.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.20.1 -->

Pāṭikaputta heard,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.20.2 -->

‘It seems that very well-known Licchavis, well-to-do brahmins, rich householders, and ascetics and brahmins who follow various other religions have come forth.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.20.3 -->

And the ascetic Gotama is sitting in my monastery for the day’s meditation.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.20.4 -->

When he heard that, he became frightened, scared, his hair standing on end.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.20.5 -->

In fear he went to the Pale-Moon Ebony Trunk Monastery of the wanderers.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.20.6 -->

The assembly heard of this,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.20.7 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.20.8 -->

and instructed a man,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.20.9 -->

‘Come, my man, go to see Pāṭikaputta at the Pale-Moon Ebony Trunk Monastery and say to him,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.20.10 -->

“Come forth, Reverend Pāṭikaputta! All these very well-known people have come forth, and the ascetic Gotama is sitting in your monastery for the day’s meditation.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.20.11 -->

For you stated this in the assembly at Vesālī:

<!-- @segment dn24:1.20.12 -->

‘Both the ascetic Gotama and I speak from knowledge.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.20.13 -->

One who speaks from knowledge ought to display a superhuman demonstration of psychic power to another who speaks from knowledge.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.20.14 -->

If the ascetic Gotama meets me half-way,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.20.15 -->

there we should both perform a superhuman demonstration of psychic power.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.20.16 -->

If he performs one demonstration of psychic power, I’ll perform two.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.20.17 -->

If he performs two, I’ll perform four.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.20.18 -->

If he performs four, I’ll perform eight.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.20.19 -->

However many demonstrations of psychic power the ascetic Gotama performs, I’ll perform double.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.20.20 -->

Come forth, Reverend Pāṭikaputta, half-way.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.20.21 -->

The ascetic Gotama has come the first half, and is sitting in your monastery.”’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.21.1 -->

‘Yes, worthy sir,’ replied that man, and delivered the message.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.21.2 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.21.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.21.4 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.21.5 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.21.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.21.7 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.21.8 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.21.9 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.21.10 -->

When he had spoken, Pāṭikaputta said: ‘I’m coming, respectable sir, I’m coming!’ But wriggle as he might, he couldn’t get up from his seat.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.21.11 -->

Then that man said to Pāṭikaputta,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.21.12 -->

‘What’s up, Reverend Pāṭikaputta? Is your bottom stuck to the bench, or is the bench stuck to your bottom?

<!-- @segment dn24:1.21.13 -->

You say “I’m coming, respectable sir, I’m coming!” But wriggle as you might, you can’t get up from your seat.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.21.14 -->

And as he was speaking, Pāṭikaputta said: ‘I’m coming, respectable sir, I’m coming!’ But wriggle as he might, he couldn’t get up from his seat.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.22.1 -->

When that man knew

<!-- @segment dn24:1.22.2 -->

that Pāṭikaputta had lost,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.22.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:1.22.4 -->

he returned to the assembly and said,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.22.5 -->

‘Pāṭikaputta has lost, worthies.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.22.6 -->

He says “I’m coming, respectable sir, I’m coming!” But wriggle as he might, he can’t get up from his seat.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.22.7 -->

When he said this, I said to the assembly,

<!-- @segment dn24:1.22.8 -->

‘The naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta is not capable of meeting me face to face, unless he gives up that statement and that intention, and lets go of that view.

<!-- @segment dn24:1.22.9 -->

If he thinks he can

<!-- @segment dn24:1.22.10 -->

meet me face to face without giving up those things, his head may explode.’

<!-- @segment dn24:1.22.11 -->

The first recitation section is complete.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.1.1 -->

Then, Bhaggava, a certain Licchavi minister stood up and said to the assembly,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.1.2 -->

‘Well then, worthies, wait a while, I’ll go.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.1.3 -->

Hopefully I’ll be able to lead Pāṭikaputta back to the assembly.’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.1.4 -->

So that minister went to see Pāṭikaputta and said,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.1.5 -->

‘Come forth, Reverend Pāṭikaputta! It’s best for you to come forth. All these very well-known people have come forth, and the ascetic Gotama is sitting in your monastery for the day’s meditation.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.1.6 -->

You said you’d meet the ascetic Gotama half-way.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.1.7 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.1.8 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.1.9 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.1.10 -->

The ascetic Gotama has come the first half, and is sitting in your monastery.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.1.11 -->

The ascetic Gotama has told the assembly

<!-- @segment dn24:2.1.12 -->

that you’re not capable of meeting him face to face.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.1.13 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.1.14 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.1.15 -->

Come forth, Pāṭikaputta! When you come forth we’ll make you win and the ascetic Gotama lose.’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.2.1 -->

When he had spoken, Pāṭikaputta said: ‘I’m coming, respectable sir, I’m coming!’ But wriggle as he might, he couldn’t get up from his seat.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.2.2 -->

Then the minister said to Pāṭikaputta,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.2.3 -->

‘What’s up, Reverend Pāṭikaputta? Is your bottom stuck to the bench, or is the bench stuck to your bottom?

<!-- @segment dn24:2.2.4 -->

You say “I’m coming, respectable sir, I’m coming!” But wriggle as you might, you can’t get up from your seat.’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.2.5 -->

And as he was speaking, Pāṭikaputta said: ‘I’m coming, respectable sir, I’m coming!’ But wriggle as he might, he couldn’t get up from his seat.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.3.1 -->

When the Licchavi minister knew

<!-- @segment dn24:2.3.2 -->

that Pāṭikaputta had lost,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.3.3 -->

he returned to the assembly and said,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.3.4 -->

‘Pāṭikaputta has lost, worthies.’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.3.5 -->

When he said this, I said to the assembly,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.3.6 -->

‘Pāṭikaputta is not capable of meeting me face to face, otherwise

<!-- @segment dn24:2.3.7 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.3.8 -->

his head may explode.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.3.9 -->

Even if the good Licchavis were to think,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.3.10 -->

“Let’s bind Pāṭikaputta with straps and drag him with a pair of oxen!” But either the straps will break or Pāṭikaputta will.’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.3.11 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.3.12 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.3.13 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.4.1 -->

Then, Bhaggava, Jāliya, the pupil of the wood-bowl ascetic, stood up and said to the assembly,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.4.2 -->

‘Well then, worthies, wait a while, I’ll go.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.4.3 -->

Hopefully I’ll be able to lead Pāṭikaputta back to the assembly.’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.4.4 -->

So Jāliya went to see Pāṭikaputta and said,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.4.5 -->

‘Come forth, Reverend Pāṭikaputta! It’s best for you to come forth. All these very well-known people have come forth, and the ascetic Gotama is sitting in your monastery for the day’s meditation.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.4.6 -->

You said you’d meet the ascetic Gotama half-way.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.4.7 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.4.8 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.4.9 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.4.10 -->

The ascetic Gotama has come the first half, and is sitting in your monastery.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.4.11 -->

The ascetic Gotama has told the assembly

<!-- @segment dn24:2.4.12 -->

that you’re not capable of meeting him face to face.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.4.13 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.4.14 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.4.15 -->

And he said that even if the Licchavis

<!-- @segment dn24:2.4.16 -->

try to bind you with straps and drag you with a pair of oxen, either the straps will break or you will.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.4.17 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.4.18 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.4.19 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.4.20 -->

Come forth, Pāṭikaputta! When you come forth we’ll make you win and the ascetic Gotama lose.’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.5.1 -->

When he had spoken, Pāṭikaputta said: ‘I’m coming, respectable sir, I’m coming!’ But wriggle as he might, he couldn’t get up from his seat.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.5.2 -->

Then Jāliya said to Pāṭikaputta,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.5.3 -->

‘What’s up, Reverend Pāṭikaputta? Is your bottom stuck to the bench, or is the bench stuck to your bottom?

<!-- @segment dn24:2.5.4 -->

You say “I’m coming, respectable sir, I’m coming!” But wriggle as you might, you can’t get up from your seat.’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.5.5 -->

And as he was speaking, Pāṭikaputta said: ‘I’m coming, respectable sir, I’m coming!’ But wriggle as he might, he couldn’t get up from his seat.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.6.1 -->

When Jāliya knew

<!-- @segment dn24:2.6.2 -->

that Pāṭikaputta had lost, he said to him,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.6.3 -->

‘Once upon a time, Reverend Pāṭikaputta, it occurred to a lion, king of beasts,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.6.4 -->

“Why don’t I make my lair near a certain forest?

<!-- @segment dn24:2.6.5 -->

Towards evening I can emerge from my den, yawn, survey the four quarters, roar my lion’s roar three times, and set out on the hunt.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.6.6 -->

Having slain the very best of the deer herd, and eaten the most tender flesh, I could return to my den.”

<!-- @segment dn24:2.6.7 -->

And so that’s what he did.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.6.8 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.6.9 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.6.10 -->

Now, there was an old jackal who had grown fat on the lion’s leavings, becoming arrogant and strong.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.6.11 -->

He thought,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.6.12 -->

“What does the lion, king of beasts, have that I don’t?

<!-- @segment dn24:2.6.13 -->

Why don’t I also make my lair near a certain forest?

<!-- @segment dn24:2.6.14 -->

Towards evening I can emerge from my den, yawn, survey the four quarters, roar my lion’s roar three times, and set out on the hunt.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.6.15 -->

Having slain the very best of the deer herd, and eaten the most tender flesh, I could return to my den.”

<!-- @segment dn24:2.7.1 -->

And so that’s what he did.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.7.2 -->

But when he tried to roar a lion’s roar, he only managed to squeal and yelp like a jackal. And what is a pathetic jackal’s squeal next to the roar of a lion?

<!-- @segment dn24:2.7.3 -->

In the same way, reverend, while living off the leavings of the Holy One, enjoying the leftovers of the Holy One, you presume to attack the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha!

<!-- @segment dn24:2.7.4 -->

Who are the pathetic Pāṭikaputtas to attack the Realized Ones, the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas?’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.8.1 -->

When Jāliya couldn’t get Pāṭikaputta to shift from his seat even with this simile,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.8.2 -->

he said to him:

<!-- @segment dn24:2.8.3 -->

‘Seeing himself as equal to the lion,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.8.4 -->

the jackal presumed “I’m the king of the beasts!”

<!-- @segment dn24:2.8.5 -->

But he actually only managed to yelp,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.8.6 -->

and what’s a sad jackal’s squeal to the roar of a lion?

<!-- @segment dn24:2.8.7 -->

In the same way, reverend, while living off the leavings of the Holy One, you presume to attack him!’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.8.8 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.9.1 -->

When Jāliya couldn’t get Pāṭikaputta to shift from his seat even with this simile,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.9.2 -->

he said to him:

<!-- @segment dn24:2.9.3 -->

‘Following in the steps of another,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.9.4 -->

seeing himself grown fat on scraps,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.9.5 -->

until he doesn’t even see himself,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.9.6 -->

the jackal presumes he’s a tiger.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.9.7 -->

But he actually only managed to yelp,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.9.8 -->

and what’s a sad jackal’s squeal to the roar of a lion?

<!-- @segment dn24:2.9.9 -->

In the same way, reverend, while living off the leavings of the Holy One, you presume to attack him!’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.9.10 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.10.1 -->

When Jāliya couldn’t get Pāṭikaputta to shift from his seat even with this simile,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.10.2 -->

he said to him:

<!-- @segment dn24:2.10.3 -->

‘Gorged on frogs, and mice from the barn,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.10.4 -->

and carcasses tossed in the cemetery,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.10.5 -->

thriving in the great, empty wood,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.10.6 -->

the jackal presumed “I’m the king of the beasts!”

<!-- @segment dn24:2.10.7 -->

But he actually only managed to yelp,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.10.8 -->

and what’s a sad jackal’s squeal to the roar of a lion?

<!-- @segment dn24:2.10.9 -->

In the same way, reverend, while living off the leavings of the Holy One, enjoying the leftovers of the Holy One, you presume to attack the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha!

<!-- @segment dn24:2.10.10 -->

Who are the pathetic Pāṭikaputtas to attack the Realized Ones, the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas?’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.11.1 -->

When Jāliya couldn’t get Pāṭikaputta to shift from his seat even with this simile,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.11.2 -->

he returned to the assembly and said,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.11.3 -->

‘Pāṭikaputta has lost, worthies. He says “I’m coming, respectable sirs, I’m coming!” But wriggle as he might, he can’t get up from his seat.’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.12.1 -->

When he said this, I said to the assembly,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.12.2 -->

‘The naked ascetic Pāṭikaputta is not capable of meeting me face to face, unless he gives up that statement and that intention, and lets go of that view.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.12.3 -->

If he thinks he can

<!-- @segment dn24:2.12.4 -->

meet me face to face without giving up those things, his head may explode.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.12.5 -->

The good Licchavis might even think,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.12.6 -->

“Let’s bind Pāṭikaputta with straps and drag him with a pair of oxen!” But either the straps will break or Pāṭikaputta will.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.12.7 -->

Pāṭikaputta is not capable of meeting me face to face, otherwise

<!-- @segment dn24:2.12.8 -->

his head may explode.’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.13.1 -->

Then, Bhaggava, I educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired that assembly with a Dhamma talk. I released that assembly from the great bondage, and lifted 84,000 beings from the great swamp. Next I entered upon the fire element, rose into the air to the height of seven palm trees, and created a flame another seven palm trees high, blazing and smoking. Finally I landed at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.13.2 -->

Then Sunakkhatta came to me, bowed, and sat down to one side. I said to him,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.13.3 -->

‘What do you think, Sunakkhatta?

<!-- @segment dn24:2.13.4 -->

Did the declaration I made about Pāṭikaputta turn out to be correct, or not?’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.13.5 -->

‘It turned out to be correct.’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.13.6 -->

‘What do you think, Sunakkhatta?

<!-- @segment dn24:2.13.7 -->

If that is so, has a superhuman demonstration of psychic power been performed or not?’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.13.8 -->

‘Clearly, sir, a superhuman demonstration of psychic power has been performed.’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.13.9 -->

‘Though I perform such a superhuman demonstration of psychic power you say this:

<!-- @segment dn24:2.13.10 -->

“But sir, the Buddha never performs any superhuman demonstrations of psychic power for me.”

<!-- @segment dn24:2.13.11 -->

See how far you have strayed!’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.13.12 -->

Though I spoke to Sunakkhatta like this, he still left this teaching and training, like someone on the highway to hell.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.14.0 -->

6. On Describing the Origin of the World

<!-- @segment dn24:2.14.1 -->

Bhaggava, I understand the origin of the world.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.14.2 -->

I understand this, and what goes beyond it. Yet since I do not misapprehend that understanding, I have realized quenching within myself. Directly knowing this, the Realized One does not come to ruin.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.14.3 -->

There are some ascetics and brahmins who describe the origin of the world in their tradition as created by the God Almighty, by the Divinity.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.14.4 -->

I go up to them and say,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.14.5 -->

‘Is it really true that this is the venerables’ view?’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.14.6 -->

And they answer, ‘Yes’.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.14.7 -->

I say to them,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.14.8 -->

‘But how do you describe in your tradition that the origin of the world came about as created by the God Almighty, by the Divinity?’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.14.9 -->

But they are stumped by my question, and they even question me in return.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.14.10 -->

So I answer them,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.14.11 -->

‘There comes a time when, reverends, after a very long period has passed, this cosmos contracts.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.14.12 -->

As the cosmos contracts, sentient beings are mostly headed for the realm of streaming radiance.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.14.13 -->

There they are mind-made, feeding on rapture, self-luminous, wandering in midair, steadily glorious, and they remain like that for a very long time.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.15.1 -->

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, this cosmos expands.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.15.2 -->

As it expands an empty mansion of divinity appears.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.15.3 -->

Then a certain sentient being—due to the running out of their lifespan or merit—passes away from that host of radiant deities and is reborn in that empty mansion of divinity.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.15.4 -->

There they are mind-made, feeding on rapture, self-luminous, wandering in midair, steadily glorious, and they remain like that for a very long time.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.16.1 -->

But after staying there all alone for a long time, they become dissatisfied and anxious,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.16.2 -->

“Oh, if only other beings would come to this place.”

<!-- @segment dn24:2.16.3 -->

Then other sentient beings—due to the running out of their lifespan or merit—pass away from that host of radiant deities and are reborn in that mansion of divinity in company with that being.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.16.4 -->

There they too are mind-made, feeding on rapture, self-luminous, wandering in midair, steadily glorious, and they remain like that for a very long time.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.1 -->

Now, the being who was reborn there first thinks,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.2 -->

“I am the Divinity, the Great Divinity, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the Universal Seer, the Wielder of Power, God Almighty, the Maker, the Creator, the First, the Begetter, the Controller, the Father of those who have been born and those yet to be born. And these beings were created by me.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.3 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.4 -->

Because first I thought,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.5 -->

‘Oh, if only other beings would come to this place.’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.6 -->

Such was my heart’s wish, and then these creatures came to this place.”

<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.7 -->

And the beings who were reborn there later also think,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.8 -->

“This must be the Divinity, the Great Divinity, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the Universal Seer, the Wielder of Power, God Almighty, the Maker, the Creator, the First, the Begetter, the Controller, the Father of those who have been born and those yet to be born.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.9 -->

And we were created by him.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.10 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.11 -->

Because we see that he was reborn here first, and we arrived later.”

<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.12 -->

And the being who was reborn first is more long-lived, beautiful, and illustrious than those who arrived later.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.13 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.14 -->

It’s possible that one of those beings passes away from that host and is reborn in this place.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.15 -->

Having done so, they go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.16 -->

By dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind, they experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they recollect that past life, but no further.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.17 -->

They say:

<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.18 -->

“He who is the Divinity—the Great Divinity, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the Universal Seer, the Wielder of Power, God Almighty, the Maker, the Creator, the First, the Begetter, the Controller, the Father of those who have been born and those yet to be born—by he we were created. He is permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, remaining the same for all eternity.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.19 -->

We who were created by that Divinity are impermanent, not lasting, short-lived, liable to pass away, and have come to this place.”

<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.20 -->

Is this how you describe in your tradition that the origin of the world came about as created by the God Almighty, by the Divinity?’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.21 -->

They say,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.22 -->

‘That is what we have heard, Reverend Gotama, just as you say.’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.23 -->

Bhaggava, I understand the origin of the world.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.17.24 -->

I understand this, and what goes beyond it. Yet since I do not misapprehend that understanding, I have realized quenching within myself. Directly knowing this, the Realized One does not come to ruin.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.18.1 -->

There are some ascetics and brahmins who describe the origin of the world in their tradition as due to those depraved by play.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.18.2 -->

I go up to them and say,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.18.3 -->

‘Is it really true that this is the venerables’ view?’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.18.4 -->

And they answer, ‘Yes’.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.18.5 -->

I say to them,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.18.6 -->

‘But how do you describe in your tradition that the origin of the world came about due to those depraved by play?’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.18.7 -->

But they are stumped by my question, and they even question me in return.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.18.8 -->

So I answer them,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.18.9 -->

‘Reverends, there are gods named “depraved by play”. They spend too much time laughing, playing, and making merry. And in doing so, they lose their mindfulness, and they pass away from that host of gods.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.18.10 -->

It’s possible that one of those beings passes away from that host and is reborn in this place.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.18.11 -->

Having done so, they go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.18.12 -->

By dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind, they experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they recollect that past life, but no further.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.18.13 -->

They say,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.18.14 -->

“The gods not depraved by play don’t spend too much time laughing, playing, and making merry. So they don’t lose their mindfulness, and don’t pass away from that host of gods.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.18.15 -->

They are permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, remaining the same for all eternity.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.18.16 -->

But we who were depraved by play spent too much time laughing, playing, and making merry. In doing so, we lost our mindfulness, and passed away from that host of gods.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.18.17 -->

We are impermanent, not lasting, short-lived, liable to pass away, and have come to this place.”

<!-- @segment dn24:2.18.18 -->

Is this how you describe in your tradition that the origin of the world came about due to those depraved by play?’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.18.19 -->

They say,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.18.20 -->

‘That is what we have heard, Reverend Gotama, just as you say.’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.18.21 -->

Bhaggava, I understand the origin of the world.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.18.22 -->

Directly knowing this, the Realized One does not come to ruin.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.19.1 -->

There are some ascetics and brahmins who describe the origin of the world in their tradition as due to those who are malevolent.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.19.2 -->

I go up to them and say,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.19.3 -->

‘Is it really true that this is the venerables’ view?’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.19.4 -->

And they answer, ‘Yes’.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.19.5 -->

I say to them,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.19.6 -->

‘But how do you describe in your tradition that the origin of the world came about due to those who are malevolent?’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.19.7 -->

But they are stumped by my question, and they even question me in return.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.19.8 -->

So I answer them,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.19.9 -->

‘Reverends, there are gods named “malevolent”. They spend too much time gazing at each other, so they grow angry with each other, and their bodies and minds get tired. They pass away from that host of gods.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.19.10 -->

It’s possible that one of those beings passes away from that host and is reborn in this place.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.19.11 -->

Having done so, they go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.19.12 -->

By dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind, they experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they recollect that past life, but no further.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.19.13 -->

They say,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.19.14 -->

“The gods who are not malevolent don’t spend too much time gazing at each other, so they don’t grow angry with each other, their bodies and minds don’t get tired, and they don’t pass away from that host of gods.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.19.15 -->

They are permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, remaining the same for all eternity.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.19.16 -->

But we who were malevolent spent too much time gazing at each other, so our minds grew angry with each other, our bodies and minds got tired, and we passed away from that host of gods.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.19.17 -->

We are impermanent, not lasting, short-lived, liable to pass away, and have come to this place.”

<!-- @segment dn24:2.19.18 -->

Is this how you describe in your tradition that the origin of the world came about due to those who are malevolent?’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.19.19 -->

They say,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.19.20 -->

‘That is what we have heard, Reverend Gotama, just as you say.’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.19.21 -->

Bhaggava, I understand the origin of the world.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.19.22 -->

Directly knowing this, the Realized One does not come to ruin.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.20.1 -->

There are some ascetics and brahmins who describe the origin of the world in their tradition as having arisen as an anomaly.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.20.2 -->

I go up to them and say,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.20.3 -->

‘Is it really true that this is the venerables’ view?’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.20.4 -->

And they answer, ‘Yes’.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.20.5 -->

I say to them,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.20.6 -->

‘But how do you describe in your tradition that the origin of the world came about anomalously?’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.20.7 -->

But they are stumped by my question, and they even question me in return.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.20.8 -->

So I answer them,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.20.9 -->

‘Reverends, there are gods named “non-percipient beings”.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.20.10 -->

When perception arises they pass away from that host of gods.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.20.11 -->

It’s possible that one of those beings passes away from that host and is reborn in this place.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.20.12 -->

Having done so, they go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.20.13 -->

By dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind, they experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they recollect the arising of perception, but no further.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.20.14 -->

They say,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.20.15 -->

“The self and the cosmos arose anomalously.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.20.16 -->

Why is that?

<!-- @segment dn24:2.20.17 -->

Because formerly I didn’t exist, whereas now, having not existed, I’ve transformed into the state of existing.”

<!-- @segment dn24:2.20.18 -->

Is this how you describe in your tradition that the origin of the world came about anomalously?’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.20.19 -->

They say,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.20.20 -->

‘That is what we have heard, Reverend Gotama, just as you say.’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.20.21 -->

I understand this, and what goes beyond it. Yet since I do not misapprehend that understanding, I have realized quenching within myself. Directly knowing this, the Realized One does not come to ruin.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.20.22 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.21.1 -->

Though I state and assert this, certain ascetics and brahmins misrepresent me with the incorrect, hollow, false, untruthful claim:

<!-- @segment dn24:2.21.2 -->

‘The ascetic Gotama has a distorted perspective, and so have his monks.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.21.3 -->

He says,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.21.4 -->

“When one enters and remains in the liberation of the beautiful, at that time one only perceives what is ugly.”’

<!-- @segment dn24:2.21.5 -->

But I don’t say that.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.21.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn24:2.21.7 -->

I say this:

<!-- @segment dn24:2.21.8 -->

‘When one enters and remains in the liberation of the beautiful, at that time one only perceives what is beautiful.’”

<!-- @segment dn24:2.21.9 -->

“They are the ones with a distorted perspective, sir, who regard the Buddha and the mendicants in this way.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.21.10 -->

Sir, I am quite confident that the Buddha is capable of teaching me so that I can enter and remain in the liberation on the beautiful.”

<!-- @segment dn24:2.21.11 -->

“It’s hard for you to enter and remain in the liberation on the beautiful, since you have a different view, creed, and belief, unless you dedicate yourself to practice with the guidance of tradition.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.21.12 -->

Come on, Bhaggava, carefully preserve the confidence that you have in me.”

<!-- @segment dn24:2.21.13 -->

“If it’s hard for me to enter and remain in the liberation on the beautiful, since I have a different view, creed, and belief, unless I dedicate myself to practice with the guidance of tradition,

<!-- @segment dn24:2.21.14 -->

I shall carefully preserve the confidence that I have in the Buddha.”

<!-- @segment dn24:2.21.15 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment dn24:2.21.16 -->

Satisfied, the wanderer of the Bhaggava clan approved what the Buddha said.
