---
slug: dn31
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: Advice to Sigālaka
---

<!-- @segment dn31:1.1 -->

So I have heard.

<!-- @segment dn31:1.2 -->

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground.

<!-- @segment dn31:1.3 -->

Now at that time the householder’s son Sigālaka rose early and left Rājagaha. With his clothes and hair all wet, he raised his cupped palms to revere the various quarters—

<!-- @segment dn31:1.4 -->

east, south, west, north, below, and above.

<!-- @segment dn31:2.1 -->

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Rājagaha for alms.

<!-- @segment dn31:2.2 -->

He saw Sigālaka revering the various quarters

<!-- @segment dn31:2.3 -->



<!-- @segment dn31:2.4 -->

and said to him,

<!-- @segment dn31:2.5 -->

“Householder’s son, why are you revering the various quarters in this way?”

<!-- @segment dn31:2.6 -->



<!-- @segment dn31:2.7 -->

“Sir, on his deathbed my father said to me:

<!-- @segment dn31:2.8 -->

‘My dear, please revere the quarters.’

<!-- @segment dn31:2.9 -->

Honoring, respecting, and venerating my father’s words, I rose early and left Rājagaha and, with my clothes and hair all wet, raised my cupped palms to revere the various quarters—

<!-- @segment dn31:2.10 -->

east, south, west, north, below, and above.”

<!-- @segment dn31:2.11.0 -->

1. The Six Directions

<!-- @segment dn31:2.12 -->

“Householder’s son, that’s not how the six directions should be revered in the training of the Noble One.”

<!-- @segment dn31:2.13 -->

“But sir, how should the six directions be revered in the training of the Noble One?

<!-- @segment dn31:2.14 -->

Sir, please teach me this.”

<!-- @segment dn31:2.15 -->

“Well then, householder’s son, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

<!-- @segment dn31:2.16 -->

“Yes, sir,” replied Sigālaka.

<!-- @segment dn31:2.17 -->

The Buddha said this:

<!-- @segment dn31:3.1 -->

“Householder’s son, a noble disciple gives up four corrupt deeds, doesn’t do bad deeds on four grounds, and avoids six drains on wealth. When they’ve left these fourteen bad things behind they have the six directions covered.

<!-- @segment dn31:3.2 -->

They’re practicing to win in both worlds, and they succeed in this world and the next.

<!-- @segment dn31:3.3 -->

When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

<!-- @segment dn31:3.4.0 -->

2. Four Corrupt Deeds

<!-- @segment dn31:3.5 -->

What four corrupt deeds have they given up?

<!-- @segment dn31:3.6 -->

Killing living creatures, stealing, sexual misconduct, and lying: these are corrupt deeds.

<!-- @segment dn31:3.7 -->

These are the four corrupt deeds they’ve given up.”

<!-- @segment dn31:3.8 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment dn31:3.9 -->

Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

<!-- @segment dn31:4.1 -->

“Killing, stealing,

<!-- @segment dn31:4.2 -->

telling lies,

<!-- @segment dn31:4.3 -->

and committing adultery:

<!-- @segment dn31:4.4 -->

astute people don’t praise these things.”

<!-- @segment dn31:5.0 -->

3. Four Grounds

<!-- @segment dn31:5.1 -->

“On what four grounds do they not do bad deeds?

<!-- @segment dn31:5.2 -->

One does bad deeds prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice.

<!-- @segment dn31:5.3 -->

When a noble disciple is not prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice,

<!-- @segment dn31:5.4 -->

they don’t do bad deeds on these four grounds.”

<!-- @segment dn31:5.5 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment dn31:5.6 -->

Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

<!-- @segment dn31:6.1 -->

“If you act against the teaching

<!-- @segment dn31:6.2 -->

out of favoritism, hostility, cowardice, or stupidity,

<!-- @segment dn31:6.3 -->

your fame shrinks,

<!-- @segment dn31:6.4 -->

like the moon in the waning fortnight.

<!-- @segment dn31:6.5 -->

If you don’t act against the teaching

<!-- @segment dn31:6.6 -->

out of favoritism, hostility, cowardice, and stupidity,

<!-- @segment dn31:6.7 -->

your fame swells,

<!-- @segment dn31:6.8 -->

like the moon in the waxing fortnight.”

<!-- @segment dn31:7.0 -->

4. Six Drains on Wealth

<!-- @segment dn31:7.1 -->

“What six drains on wealth do they avoid?

<!-- @segment dn31:7.2 -->

Habitually engaging in the following things is a drain on wealth: intoxicants of beer, wine, and liquor; roaming the streets at night; frequenting festivals; gambling; bad friends; laziness.

<!-- @segment dn31:8.0 -->

5. Six Drawbacks of Drinking

<!-- @segment dn31:8.1 -->

There are these six drawbacks of habitually consuming intoxicants of beer, wine, and liquor.

<!-- @segment dn31:8.2 -->

Immediate loss of wealth, promotion of quarrels, susceptibility to illness, disrepute, indecent exposure; and weakened wisdom is the sixth thing.

<!-- @segment dn31:8.3 -->

These are the six drawbacks of habitually consuming intoxicants of beer, wine, and liquor.

<!-- @segment dn31:9.0 -->

6. Six Drawbacks of Roaming the Streets at Night

<!-- @segment dn31:9.1 -->

There are these six drawbacks of roaming the streets at night.

<!-- @segment dn31:9.2 -->

Yourself, your partners and children, and your property are all left unguarded. You’re suspected of bad deeds. Untrue rumors spread about you. You’re at the forefront of many things that entail suffering.

<!-- @segment dn31:9.3 -->

These are the six drawbacks of roaming the streets at night.

<!-- @segment dn31:10.0 -->

7. Six Drawbacks of Festivals

<!-- @segment dn31:10.1 -->

There are these six drawbacks of frequenting festivals.

<!-- @segment dn31:10.2 -->

You’re always thinking: ‘Where’s the dancing? Where’s the singing? Where’s the music? Where are the stories? Where’s the applause? Where are the kettledrums?’

<!-- @segment dn31:10.3 -->

These are the six drawbacks of frequenting festivals.

<!-- @segment dn31:11.0 -->

8. Six Drawbacks of Gambling

<!-- @segment dn31:11.1 -->

There are these six drawbacks of habitually gambling.

<!-- @segment dn31:11.2 -->

Victory breeds enmity. The loser mourns their money. There is immediate loss of wealth. A gambler’s word carries no weight in public assembly. Friends and colleagues treat them with contempt. And no-one wants to marry a gambler, for they think:

<!-- @segment dn31:11.3 -->

‘This individual is a gambler—they’re not able to support a partner.’

<!-- @segment dn31:11.4 -->

These are the six drawbacks of habitually gambling.

<!-- @segment dn31:12.0 -->

9. Six Drawbacks of Bad Friends

<!-- @segment dn31:12.1 -->

There are these six drawbacks of bad friends.

<!-- @segment dn31:12.2 -->

You become friends and companions with those who are addicts, carousers, drunkards, frauds, swindlers, and thugs.

<!-- @segment dn31:12.3 -->

These are the six drawbacks of bad friends.

<!-- @segment dn31:13.0 -->

10. Six Drawbacks of Laziness

<!-- @segment dn31:13.1 -->

There are these six drawbacks of habitual laziness.

<!-- @segment dn31:13.2 -->

You don’t get your work done because you think: ‘It’s too cold! It’s too hot. It’s too late! It’s too early! I’m too hungry! I’m too full!’

<!-- @segment dn31:13.3 -->

By dwelling on so many excuses for not working, you don’t make any more money, and the money you already have runs out.

<!-- @segment dn31:13.4 -->

These are the six drawbacks of habitual laziness.”

<!-- @segment dn31:13.5 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment dn31:13.6 -->

Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

<!-- @segment dn31:14.1 -->

“Some are just drinking buddies,

<!-- @segment dn31:14.2 -->

some call you their dear, dear friend,

<!-- @segment dn31:14.3 -->

but a true friend is one

<!-- @segment dn31:14.4 -->

who stands by you in need.

<!-- @segment dn31:14.5 -->

Sleeping late, adultery,

<!-- @segment dn31:14.6 -->

making enemies, harmfulness,

<!-- @segment dn31:14.7 -->

bad friends, and avarice:

<!-- @segment dn31:14.8 -->

these six grounds ruin a person.

<!-- @segment dn31:14.9 -->

With bad friends, bad comrades,

<!-- @segment dn31:14.10 -->

bad behavior and alms-resort,

<!-- @segment dn31:14.11 -->

a man falls to ruin

<!-- @segment dn31:14.12 -->

in both this world and the next.

<!-- @segment dn31:14.13 -->

Dice, women, toddy, song and dance;

<!-- @segment dn31:14.14 -->

sleeping by day and roaming at night;

<!-- @segment dn31:14.15 -->

bad friends, and avarice:

<!-- @segment dn31:14.16 -->

these six grounds ruin a person.

<!-- @segment dn31:14.17 -->

They play dice and drink beer,

<!-- @segment dn31:14.18 -->

and consort with women loved by others.

<!-- @segment dn31:14.19 -->

Associating with the worse, not the better,

<!-- @segment dn31:14.20 -->

they diminish like the waning moon.

<!-- @segment dn31:14.21 -->

One who is broke and destitute due to toddy,

<!-- @segment dn31:14.22 -->

thirsty, drinking in the bar,

<!-- @segment dn31:14.23 -->

drowning in debt,

<!-- @segment dn31:14.24 -->

will quickly lose their way.

<!-- @segment dn31:14.25 -->

When you’re in the habit of sleeping late,

<!-- @segment dn31:14.26 -->

seeing night as time to rise,

<!-- @segment dn31:14.27 -->

and always getting drunk,

<!-- @segment dn31:14.28 -->

you can’t keep up the household life.

<!-- @segment dn31:14.29 -->

‘Too cold, too hot,

<!-- @segment dn31:14.30 -->

too late,’ they say.

<!-- @segment dn31:14.31 -->

When the young neglect their work like this,

<!-- @segment dn31:14.32 -->

riches pass them by.

<!-- @segment dn31:14.33 -->

But one who considers heat and cold

<!-- @segment dn31:14.34 -->

as no more than blades of grass—

<!-- @segment dn31:14.35 -->

he does his duties as a man,

<!-- @segment dn31:14.36 -->

and happiness never fails.”

<!-- @segment dn31:15.0 -->

11. Fake Friends

<!-- @segment dn31:15.1 -->

“Householder’s son, you should recognize these four enemies disguised as friends:

<!-- @segment dn31:15.2 -->

the taker, the talker, the flatterer, the spender.

<!-- @segment dn31:16.1 -->

You can recognize a fake friend who’s all take on four grounds.

<!-- @segment dn31:16.2 -->

Your possessions end up theirs.

<!-- @segment dn31:16.3 -->

Giving little, they expect a lot.

<!-- @segment dn31:16.4 -->

They do their duty out of fear.

<!-- @segment dn31:16.5 -->

They associate for their own advantage.

<!-- @segment dn31:16.6 -->

You can recognize a fake friend who’s all take on these four grounds.

<!-- @segment dn31:17.1 -->

You can recognize a fake friend who’s all talk on four grounds.

<!-- @segment dn31:17.2 -->

They’re hospitable in the past. They’re hospitable in the future. They’re full of meaningless pleasantries. When something needs doing in the present they point to their own misfortune.

<!-- @segment dn31:17.3 -->

You can recognize a fake friend who’s all talk on these four grounds.

<!-- @segment dn31:18.1 -->

You can recognize a fake friend who’s a flatterer on four grounds.

<!-- @segment dn31:18.2 -->

They support you equally in doing bad and doing good. They praise you to your face, and put you down behind your back.

<!-- @segment dn31:18.3 -->

You can recognize a fake friend who’s a flatterer on these four grounds.

<!-- @segment dn31:19.1 -->

You can recognize a fake friend who’s a spender on four grounds.

<!-- @segment dn31:19.2 -->

They accompany you when drinking, roaming the streets at night, frequenting festivals, and gambling.

<!-- @segment dn31:19.3 -->

You can recognize a fake friend who’s a spender on these four grounds.”

<!-- @segment dn31:19.4 -->

That is what the Buddha said.

<!-- @segment dn31:19.5 -->

Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

<!-- @segment dn31:20.1 -->

“One friend is all take,

<!-- @segment dn31:20.2 -->

another all talk;

<!-- @segment dn31:20.3 -->

one’s just a flatterer,

<!-- @segment dn31:20.4 -->

and one’s a comrade who spends.

<!-- @segment dn31:20.5 -->

An astute person understands

<!-- @segment dn31:20.6 -->

these four enemies for what they are

<!-- @segment dn31:20.7 -->

and keeps them at a distance,

<!-- @segment dn31:20.8 -->

as they’d shun a risky road.”

<!-- @segment dn31:21.0 -->

12. Good-Hearted Friends

<!-- @segment dn31:21.1 -->

“Householder’s son, you should recognize these four good-hearted friends:

<!-- @segment dn31:21.2 -->

the helper, the friend in good times and bad, the counselor, and the one who’s sympathetic.

<!-- @segment dn31:22.1 -->

You can recognize a good-hearted friend who’s a helper on four grounds.

<!-- @segment dn31:22.2 -->

They guard you when you’re negligent. They guard your property when you’re negligent. They keep you safe in times of danger. When something needs doing, they provide you with twice the money you need.

<!-- @segment dn31:22.3 -->

You can recognize a good-hearted friend who’s a helper on these four grounds.

<!-- @segment dn31:23.1 -->

You can recognize a good-hearted friend who’s the same in good times and bad on four grounds.

<!-- @segment dn31:23.2 -->

They tell you secrets. They keep your secrets. They don’t abandon you in times of trouble. They’d even give their life for your welfare.

<!-- @segment dn31:23.3 -->

You can recognize a good-hearted friend who’s the same in good times and bad on these four grounds.

<!-- @segment dn31:24.1 -->

You can recognize a good-hearted friend who’s a counselor on four grounds.

<!-- @segment dn31:24.2 -->

They keep you from doing bad. They support you in doing good. They teach you what you do not know. They explain the path to heaven.

<!-- @segment dn31:24.3 -->

You can recognize a good-hearted friend who’s a counselor on these four grounds.

<!-- @segment dn31:25.1 -->

You can recognize a good-hearted friend who’s sympathetic on four grounds.

<!-- @segment dn31:25.2 -->

They don’t delight in your misfortune. They delight in your good fortune. They keep others from criticizing you. They encourage praise of you.

<!-- @segment dn31:25.3 -->

You can recognize a good-hearted friend who’s sympathetic on these four grounds.”

<!-- @segment dn31:25.4 -->

The Buddha spoke this matter.

<!-- @segment dn31:25.5 -->

Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

<!-- @segment dn31:26.1 -->

“A friend who’s a helper,

<!-- @segment dn31:26.2 -->

one the same in both pleasure and pain,

<!-- @segment dn31:26.3 -->

a friend of good counsel,

<!-- @segment dn31:26.4 -->

and one of sympathy;

<!-- @segment dn31:26.5 -->

an astute person understands

<!-- @segment dn31:26.6 -->

these four friends for what they are

<!-- @segment dn31:26.7 -->

and carefully looks after them,

<!-- @segment dn31:26.8 -->

like a mother the child at her breast.

<!-- @segment dn31:26.9 -->

The astute and virtuous

<!-- @segment dn31:26.10 -->

shine like a burning flame.

<!-- @segment dn31:26.11 -->

They pick up riches as bees

<!-- @segment dn31:26.12 -->

roaming round pick up pollen.

<!-- @segment dn31:26.13 -->

And their riches proceed to grow,

<!-- @segment dn31:26.14 -->

like a termite mound piling up.

<!-- @segment dn31:26.15 -->

In gathering wealth like this,

<!-- @segment dn31:26.16 -->

a householder does enough for their family.

<!-- @segment dn31:26.17 -->

And they’d hold on to friends

<!-- @segment dn31:26.18 -->

by dividing their wealth in four.

<!-- @segment dn31:26.19 -->

One portion is to enjoy.

<!-- @segment dn31:26.20 -->

Two parts invest in work.

<!-- @segment dn31:26.21 -->

And the fourth should be kept

<!-- @segment dn31:26.22 -->

for times of trouble.”

<!-- @segment dn31:27.0 -->

13. Covering the Six Directions

<!-- @segment dn31:27.1 -->

“And how, householder’s son, does a noble disciple cover the six directions?

<!-- @segment dn31:27.2 -->

These six directions should be recognized:

<!-- @segment dn31:27.3 -->

parents as the east, tutors as the south, partner and children as the west, friends and colleagues as the north, bondservants and workers as beneath, and ascetics and brahmins as above.

<!-- @segment dn31:28.1 -->

A child should serve their parents as the eastern quarter in five ways, thinking:

<!-- @segment dn31:28.2 -->

‘I will support those who supported me. I’ll do my duty for them. I’ll maintain the family lineage. I’ll take care of the inheritance. When they have passed away, I’ll make an offering on their behalf.’

<!-- @segment dn31:28.3 -->

Parents served by the children in these five ways show sympathy to them in five ways.

<!-- @segment dn31:28.4 -->

They keep them from doing bad. They support them in doing good. They train them in a profession. They connect them with a suitable partner. They transfer the inheritance in due time.

<!-- @segment dn31:28.5 -->

Parents served by their children in these five ways show sympathy to them in these five ways.

<!-- @segment dn31:28.6 -->

And that’s how the eastern quarter is covered, kept safe and free of peril.

<!-- @segment dn31:29.1 -->

A pupil should serve their tutor as the southern quarter in five ways:

<!-- @segment dn31:29.2 -->

by rising for them, by serving them, by listening well, by looking after them, and by carefully learning their profession.

<!-- @segment dn31:29.3 -->

Tutors served by their pupils in these five ways show sympathy to them in five ways.

<!-- @segment dn31:29.4 -->

They make sure they’re well educated and well drilled in memorization. They clearly explain all the knowledge of the profession. They introduce them to their friends and colleagues. They provide protection in every region.

<!-- @segment dn31:29.5 -->

Tutors served by their pupils in these five ways show sympathy to them in these five ways.

<!-- @segment dn31:29.6 -->

And that’s how the southern quarter is covered, kept safe and free of peril.

<!-- @segment dn31:30.1 -->

A husband should serve his wife as the western quarter in five ways:

<!-- @segment dn31:30.2 -->

by treating her with honor, by not looking down on her, by not being unfaithful, by relinquishing authority to her, and by presenting her with adornments.

<!-- @segment dn31:30.3 -->

A wife served by her husband in these five ways shows sympathy to him in five ways.

<!-- @segment dn31:30.4 -->

She’s well-organized in her work. She manages the domestic help. She’s not unfaithful. She preserves his earnings. She’s deft and tireless in all her duties.

<!-- @segment dn31:30.5 -->

A wife served by her husband in these five ways shows sympathy to him in these five ways.

<!-- @segment dn31:30.6 -->

And that’s how the western quarter is covered, kept safe and free of peril.

<!-- @segment dn31:31.1 -->

A gentleman should serve his friends and colleagues as the northern quarter in five ways:

<!-- @segment dn31:31.2 -->

giving, kindly words, taking care, equality, and not using tricky words.

<!-- @segment dn31:31.3 -->

Friends and colleagues served by a gentleman in these five ways show sympathy to him in five ways.

<!-- @segment dn31:31.4 -->

They guard him when they’re negligent. They guard his property when they’re negligent. They keep him safe in times of danger. They don’t abandon him in times of trouble. They honor his descendants.

<!-- @segment dn31:31.5 -->

Friends and colleagues served by a gentleman in these five ways show sympathy to him in these five ways.

<!-- @segment dn31:31.6 -->

And that’s how the northern quarter is covered, kept safe and free of peril.

<!-- @segment dn31:32.1 -->

A master should serve their bondservants and workers as the lower quarter in five ways:

<!-- @segment dn31:32.2 -->

by organizing work according to ability, by paying food and wages, by nursing them when sick, by sharing special treats, and by giving time off work.

<!-- @segment dn31:32.3 -->

Bondservants and workers served by a master in these five ways show sympathy to him in five ways.

<!-- @segment dn31:32.4 -->

They get up first, and go to bed last. They don’t steal. They do their work well. And they promote a good reputation.

<!-- @segment dn31:32.5 -->

Bondservants and workers served by a master in these five ways show sympathy to him in these five ways.

<!-- @segment dn31:32.6 -->

And that’s how the lower quarter is covered, kept safe and free of peril.

<!-- @segment dn31:33.1 -->

A gentleman should serve ascetics and brahmins as the upper quarter in five ways:

<!-- @segment dn31:33.2 -->

by loving deeds of body, speech, and mind, by not turning them away at the gate, and by providing them with material needs.

<!-- @segment dn31:33.3 -->

Ascetics and brahmins served by a gentleman in these five ways show sympathy to him in six ways.

<!-- @segment dn31:33.4 -->

They keep him from doing bad. They support him in doing good. They think of him with kindly thoughts. They teach him what he does not know. They clarify what he’s already learned. They explain the path to heaven.

<!-- @segment dn31:33.5 -->

Ascetics and brahmins served by a gentleman in these five ways show sympathy to him in these six ways.

<!-- @segment dn31:33.6 -->

And that’s how the upper quarter is covered, kept safe and free of peril.”

<!-- @segment dn31:33.7 -->

The Buddha spoke this matter.

<!-- @segment dn31:33.8 -->

Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

<!-- @segment dn31:34.1 -->

“Parents are the east,

<!-- @segment dn31:34.2 -->

tutors the south,

<!-- @segment dn31:34.3 -->

wives and child the west,

<!-- @segment dn31:34.4 -->

friends and colleagues the north,

<!-- @segment dn31:34.5 -->

servants and workers below,

<!-- @segment dn31:34.6 -->

and ascetics and brahmins above.

<!-- @segment dn31:34.7 -->

By honoring these quarters

<!-- @segment dn31:34.8 -->

a householder does enough for their family.

<!-- @segment dn31:34.9 -->

The astute and the virtuous,

<!-- @segment dn31:34.10 -->

the gentle and the articulate,

<!-- @segment dn31:34.11 -->

the placid in manner and the amenable:

<!-- @segment dn31:34.12 -->

they’re the kind who win glory.

<!-- @segment dn31:34.13 -->

The diligent, not lazy,

<!-- @segment dn31:34.14 -->

those not disturbed by troubles,

<!-- @segment dn31:34.15 -->

those consistent in conduct, the intelligent:

<!-- @segment dn31:34.16 -->

they’re the kind who win glory.

<!-- @segment dn31:34.17 -->

The inclusive, the makers of friends,

<!-- @segment dn31:34.18 -->

the bountiful, those rid of stinginess,

<!-- @segment dn31:34.19 -->

those who lead, train, and persuade:

<!-- @segment dn31:34.20 -->

they’re the kind who win glory.

<!-- @segment dn31:34.21 -->

Giving and kindly words,

<!-- @segment dn31:34.22 -->

taking care here,

<!-- @segment dn31:34.23 -->

and treating equally in worldly conditions,

<!-- @segment dn31:34.24 -->

as they deserve in each case;

<!-- @segment dn31:34.25 -->

these ways of being inclusive in the world

<!-- @segment dn31:34.26 -->

are like a moving chariot’s linchpin.

<!-- @segment dn31:34.27 -->

If there were no such ways of being inclusive,

<!-- @segment dn31:34.28 -->

neither mother nor father

<!-- @segment dn31:34.29 -->

would be respected and honored

<!-- @segment dn31:34.30 -->

for what they’ve done for their children.

<!-- @segment dn31:34.31 -->

But since these ways of being inclusive do exist,

<!-- @segment dn31:34.32 -->

the astute do regard them well,

<!-- @segment dn31:34.33 -->

so they achieve greatness

<!-- @segment dn31:34.34 -->

and are praised.”

<!-- @segment dn31:35.1 -->

When this was said, Sigālaka the householder’s son said to the Buddha,

<!-- @segment dn31:35.2 -->

“Excellent, sir! Excellent!

<!-- @segment dn31:35.3 -->

As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, the Buddha has made the teaching clear in many ways.

<!-- @segment dn31:35.4 -->

I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha.

<!-- @segment dn31:35.5 -->

From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”
