---
slug: dhp129-145
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: 10. The Rod
---

All tremble at the rod,

All tremble at the rod,

Creatures love happiness,

Creatures love happiness,

Don’t speak harshly,

If you still yourself

As a cowherd drives the cows

The fool does not understand

One who violently attacks

harsh pain; loss;

hazards from rulers;

or else their home

Not nudity, nor matted hair, nor mud,

Dressed up they may be, but if they live well—

Can a person constrained by conscience

Like a fine horse under the whip,

While irrigators guide water,

all fear death.

all love life.

so if you harm them with a stick

so if you don’t harm them with a stick

they may speak harshly back.

like a broken gong,

to pasture with the rod,

the evil that they do.

the peaceful and the innocent

the breakup of the body;

vicious slander;

is consumed by fire.

nor fasting, nor lying on bare ground,

peaceful, tamed, committed to the spiritual path,

be found in the world?

be keen and full of urgency.

fletchers shape arrows,

Treating others like oneself,

Treating others like oneself,

in search of your own happiness,

in search of your own happiness,

For aggressive speech is painful,

you reach extinguishment

so too old age and death

But because of those deeds, that simpleton

swiftly falls

serious illness;

loss of kin;

When their body breaks up, that witless person

nor wearing dust and dirt, or squatting on the heels,

having laid aside violence towards all creatures—

Who shies away from blame,

With faith, ethics, and energy,

and carpenters carve timber—

neither kill nor incite to kill.

neither kill nor incite to kill.

after death you won’t find happiness.

after death you will find happiness.

and the rod may spring back on you.

and know no conflict.

drive life from living beings.

is tormented as if burnt by fire.

to one of ten bad states:

mental distress;

destruction of wealth;

is reborn in hell.

will cleanse a mortal not free of doubt.

they are a brahmin, an ascetic, a mendicant.

like a fine horse from the whip?

immersion, and investigation of principles,

those true to their vows tame themselves.

accomplished in knowledge and conduct, mindful,

give up this vast suffering.
