---
slug: dhp167-178
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: 13. The World
---

Don’t resort to lowly things,

Get up, don’t be heedless,

Live by principle, with good conduct,

Look upon the world

Come, see this world decked out

He who once was heedless,

Someone whose bad deed

Blind is the world,

Swans fly by the sun’s path,

When a personage, spurning the hereafter,

The miserly don’t ascend to heaven,

The fruit of stream-entry is better

don’t abide in negligence,

live by principle, with good conduct.

don’t conduct yourself badly.

as a bubble

like a fancy royal chariot.

but turned to heedfulness,

is supplanted by the good,

few are those who clearly see.

psychic sages fly through space.

transgresses in just one thing—

it takes a fool to not praise giving.

than being the one king of the earth,

don’t resort to wrong views,

For one of good conduct sleeps at ease,

For one of good conduct sleeps at ease,

or a mirage,

Here fools founder,

lights up the world

lights up the world,

Only a handful go to heaven,

The attentive leave the world,

lying—

The attentive celebrate giving,

than going to heaven,

don’t perpetuate the world.

in this world and the next.

in this world and the next.

then the King of Death won’t see you.

but the discerning are not chained.

like the moon freed from clouds.

like the moon freed from clouds.

like a bird freed from a net.

having vanquished Māra with his legions.

there is no evil they would not do.

and so find happiness in the hereafter.

than lordship over all the world.
