---
slug: dhp146-156
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: 11. Old Age
---

What is joy, what is laughter,

See this fancy puppet,

This body is decrepit and frail,

These dove-grey bones

In this city built of bones,

Fancy chariots of kings wear out,

A person of little learning

Transmigrating through countless rebirths,

I’ve seen you, house-builder!

When young they spurned the spiritual path

When young they spurned the spiritual path

when the flames are ever burning?

a body built of sores,

a nest of disease.

are tossed away like

plastered with flesh and blood,

and even this body gets old.

ages like an ox—

I’ve journeyed without reward,

You won’t build a house again!

and failed to earn any wealth.

and failed to earn any wealth.

Swathed in darkness,

diseased, obsessed over,

This foul carcass falls apart,

dried gourds in the autumn—

old age and death are stashed away,

But the truth of the good never gets old—

their flesh grows,

searching for the house-builder;

Your rafters are all broken,

Now they brood like old cranes

Now they lie like spent arrows,

would you not seek a light?

in which nothing lasts at all.

for life ends in death.

what joy is there in such a sight?

along with conceit and contempt.

so the good proclaim to the good.

but not their wisdom.

painful is birth again and again.

your roof-peak demolished.

in a pond bereft of fish.

bemoaning over things past.

The mind, set on demolition,

has reached the end of cravings.
