---
slug: dhp1-20
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: 1. Pairs
---

Intention shapes experiences;

Intention shapes experiences;

“They abused me, they hit me!

“They abused me, they hit me!

For never is hatred

When others do not understand,

Those who contemplate the beautiful,

Those who contemplate the ugly,

One who, not free of stains themselves,

One who’s purged all their stains,

Thinking the inessential is essential,

Having known the essential as essential,

Just as rain seeps into

Just as rain doesn’t seep into

Here they grieve, hereafter they grieve,

Here they rejoice, hereafter they rejoice,

Here they’re tormented, <j>hereafter they’re tormented,

Here they delight, hereafter they delight,

Much though they may recite scripture,

Little though they may recite scripture,

intention is first, they’re made by intention.

intention is first, they’re made by intention.

They beat me, they robbed me!”

They beat me, they robbed me!”

laid to rest by hate,

let us, who do understand this,

their faculties unrestrained,

their faculties well-restrained,

would wear the robe stained in ocher,

steady in ethics,

seeing the essential as inessential;

and the inessential as inessential;

a poorly roofed house,

a well roofed house,

an evildoer grieves in both places.

one who does good rejoices in both places.

an evildoer is tormented in both places.

one who does good delights in both places.

if a negligent person does not apply them,

if they live in line with the teaching,

If with corrupt intent

If with pure intent

For those who bear such a grudge,

For those who bear no such grudge,

it’s laid to rest by love:

restrain ourselves in this regard;

immoderate in eating,

eating in moderation,

bereft of self-control and of truth:

possessed of self-control and of truth,

they don’t realize the essential,

they realize the essential,

lust seeps into

lust doesn’t seep into

They grieve and fret,

They rejoice and celebrate,

They’re tormented <j>thinking of bad things they’ve done;

They delight thinking of good things they’ve done;

then, like a cowherd who counts the cattle of others,

having given up greed, hate, and delusion,

you speak or act,

you speak or act,

hatred is never laid to rest.

hatred is laid to rest.

this is an ancient teaching.

for that is how conflicts are laid to rest.

lazy, lacking energy:

faithful and energetic:

they are not worthy of the ocher robe.

they are truly worthy of the ocher robe.

for wrong thoughts are their habitat.

for right thoughts are their habitat.

an undeveloped mind.

a well developed mind.

seeing their own corrupt deeds.

seeing their own pure deeds.

when gone to a bad place, <j>they’re tormented all the more.

when gone to a good place, they delight all the more.

they miss out on the blessings of the ascetic life.

with deep understanding and heart well freed,

suffering follows you,

happiness follows you

Māra strikes them down

Māra cannot strike them down,

not grasping to this life or the next,

like a wheel, the ox’s foot.

like a shadow that never leaves.

like the wind, a feeble tree.

like the wind, a rocky mountain.

they share in the blessings of the ascetic life.
