---
slug: dhp157-166
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: 12. The Self
---

If you knew your self as beloved,

The astute would avoid being corrupted

If one were to treat oneself

One is indeed the lord of oneself,

For the evil that is done by oneself,

One choked by immorality,

It’s easy to do bad things

On account of wicked views—

For it is by oneself that evil’s done,

Never neglect what is good for yourself

you’d look after it so well.

by first grounding themselves

as one instructs another,

for who else would be one’s lord?

born and produced in oneself,

as a sal tree by a creeper,

harmful to oneself,

scorning the guidance

one is corrupted by oneself.

for the sake of another, however great.

In one of the night’s three watches,

in what is suitable,

the well-tamed indeed would tame:

By means of a well-tamed self,

grinds down a simpleton,

does to themselves

but good things that are helpful

of the perfected ones,

It’s by oneself that evil’s not done,

Knowing well what is good for yourself,

an astute person would remain alert.

and then instructing others.

for the self, it seems, is hard to tame.

one gains a lord that’s rare indeed.

as diamond grinds a lesser gem.

what a foe only wishes.

are the hardest things to do.

the noble ones living righteously—

one is purified by oneself.

be intent upon your heart’s goal.

the idiot begets their own self’s demise,

Purity and impurity are personal matters,

like the bamboo bearing fruit.

no one can purify another.
