---
slug: dhp197-208
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: 15. Happiness
---

Let us live so very happily,

Let us live so very happily,

Let us live so very happily,

Let us live so very happily,

Victory breeds enmity;

There is no fire like greed,

Hunger is the worst illness,

Health is the ultimate blessing;

Having drunk the nectar of seclusion

It’s good to see the noble ones,

For one who consorts with fools

Therefore:

loving among the hostile.

healthy among the ailing.

content among the greedy.

we who have nothing.

the defeated sleep badly.

no crime like hate,

conditions are the worst suffering.

contentment, the ultimate wealth;

and the nectar of peace—

staying with them is always good.

grieves long.

An attentive one, wise and learned,

Among hostile humans,

Among ailing humans

Among greedy humans,

We shall feed on rapture,

The peaceful sleep at ease,

no suffering like the aggregates,

When one has known this as it is.

trust is the ultimate family;

free of stress, free of evil,

Were you not to see fools,

Painful is living with fools,

a behemoth of virtue, true to their vows, noble:

let us live with love.

let us live healthily.

let us live content.

like the gods of streaming radiance.

having left victory and defeat behind.

no bliss beyond peace.

extinguishment is the ultimate happiness.

extinguishment, the ultimate happiness.

drink the joyous nectar of truth.

you’d always be happy.

like being stuck with your enemy.

follow a true and intelligent person such as this,

Happy is living with an attentive one,

as the moon tracks the path of the stars.

like meeting with your kin.
