---
slug: dhp116-128
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: 9. Wickedness
---

Rush to do good,

If you do something bad,

If you do something good,

Even the wicked see good things,

Even the good see wicked things,

Think not lightly of evil,

Think not lightly of goodness,

Avoid wickedness,

You can carry poison in your hand

Whoever wrongs a man who has done no wrong,

Some are born in a womb;

Not in midair, nor mid-ocean,

Not in midair, nor mid-ocean,

shield your mind from evil;

don’t do it again and again,

do it again and again,

so long as their wickedness has not ripened.

so long as their goodness has not ripened.

that it won’t come back to you.

that it won’t come back to you.

as a merchant with rich cargo and small escort

if it has no wound,

a pure man who has not a blemish,

evildoers go to hell;

nor hiding in a mountain cleft;

nor hiding in a mountain cleft;

for when you’re slow to do good,

don’t set your heart on it,

set your heart on it,

But as soon as that wickedness ripens,

But as soon as that goodness ripens,

The pot is filled with water

The pot is filled with water

would avoid a dangerous road,

for poison does not infect without a wound;

the evil backfires on the fool,

the virtuous go to heaven;

you’ll find no place on the planet

you’ll find no place on the planet

your thoughts delight in wickedness.

for piling up evil is suffering.

for piling up goodness is joyful.

then the wicked see wicked things.

then the good see good things.

falling drop by drop;

falling drop by drop;

or one who loves life would avoid drinking poison.

nothing bad happens unless you do bad.

like fine dust thrown upwind.

the undefiled are fully extinguished.

to escape your wicked deeds.

where you won’t be vanquished by death.

the fool is filled with wickedness

the attentive one is filled with goodness

piled up bit by bit.

piled up bit by bit.
