---
slug: dhp179-196
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: 14. The Buddhas
---

He whose victory may not be undone,

Of craving, the weaver, the clinger, he has none:

The attentive intent on absorption,

It’s hard to gain a human birth;

Not to do any evil;

Patient acceptance is the ultimate fervor.

Not speaking ill nor doing harm;

Even if it were raining money,

Thus they find no delight

So many go for refuge

But such refuge is no sanctuary,

One gone for refuge to the Buddha,

suffering, suffering’s origin,

Such refuge is a sanctuary,

It’s hard to find a thoroughbred man:

Happy, the arising of Buddhas!

When a person venerates the worthy—

quenched, fearing nothing from any quarter—

a victory unrivaled in all the world;

so where can he be traced?

who love the peace of renunciation,

the life of mortals is hard;

to embrace the good;

Extinguishment is the ultimate, say the Buddhas.

restraint in the monastic code;

you’d not be sated in sensual pleasures.

even in celestial pleasures.

to mountains and forest groves,

it is no supreme refuge.

to his teaching and to the Saṅgha,

suffering’s transcendence,

it is the supreme refuge.

they’re not born just anywhere.

Happy, the teaching of Dhamma!

the Buddha or his disciple,

the merit of one venerating such as these,

by what track would you trace that Buddha,

By what track would you trace that Buddha,

the Buddhas, ever mindful,

it’s hard to hear the true teaching;

to purify one’s mind:

No true renunciate injures another,

moderation in eating;

An astute person understands that sensual pleasures

A disciple of the fully awakened Buddha

to shrines in tended parks;

By going to that refuge,

sees the four noble truths

and the noble eightfold path

By going to that refuge,

A family where that attentive one is born

Happy is the harmony of the Saṅgha,

who have transcended proliferation,

cannot be calculated by anyone,

who leaves no track in his infinite range?

who leaves no track in his infinite range?

are envied by even the gods.

the arising of Buddhas is hard.

this is the instruction of the Buddhas.

nor does an ascetic hurt another.

staying in remote lodgings;

offer little gratification and much suffering.

delights in the ending of craving.

those people are driven by fear.

you’re not released from all suffering.

with right understanding:

that leads to the stilling of suffering.

you’re released from all suffering.

prospers in happiness.

and the striving of the harmonious is happy.

and have left behind grief and lamentation,

saying it is just this much.

commitment to the higher mind—

this is the instruction of the Buddhas.
