---
slug: dhp209-220
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: 16. The Beloved
---

Applying yourself where you ought not,

Don’t ever get too close

Therefore don’t hold anything dear,

Sorrow springs from what we hold dear,

Sorrow springs from attachment,

Sorrow springs from relishing,

Sorrow springs from desire,

Sorrow springs from craving,

One accomplished in virtue and vision,

One eager to realize the ineffable

When a man returns safely

Just so, when one who has done good

neglecting what you should be doing,

to those you like or dislike.

for it’s bad to lose those you love.

fear springs from what we hold dear;

fear springs from attachment;

fear springs from relishing;

fear springs from desire;

fear springs from craving;

firmly principled, and truthful,

would be filled with awareness.

after a long time spent abroad,

goes from this world to the next,

forgetting your goal, you cling to what you hold dear,

For not seeing the liked is suffering,

No ties are found in they who

one free from holding anything dear

one free from attachment

one free from relishing

one free from desire

one free from craving

doing oneself what ought be done:

Their mind not bound to pleasures of sense,

family, friends, and loved ones

their good deeds receive them there,

jealous of those devoted to their heart’s goal.

and so is seeing the disliked.

hold nothing loved or loathed.

has no sorrow, let alone fear.

has no sorrow, let alone fear.

has no sorrow, let alone fear.

has no sorrow, let alone fear.

has no sorrow, let alone fear.

that’s who the people love.

they’re said to be heading upstream.

celebrate his return.

as family welcomes home one they love.
