---
slug: dhp221-234
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: 17. Anger
---

Give up anger, get rid of conceit,

When anger surges like a lurching chariot,

Defeat anger with kindness,

Speak the truth, do not be angry,

Those harmless sages,

Always wakeful,

It’s always been this way, Atula,

There never was, nor will be,

If, after watching them day in day out,

like a pendant of Black Plum River gold,

Guard against ill-tempered deeds,

Guard against ill-tempered words,

Guard against ill-tempered thoughts,

An attentive one is restrained in body

and escape every fetter.

keep it in check.

villainy with virtue,

and give when asked, if only a little.

always restrained in body,

practicing night and day,

it’s not just today.

nor is there today,

discerning people praise

who is worthy to criticize them?

be restrained in body.

be restrained in speech.

be restrained in mind.

restrained also in speech,

Sufferings don’t befall one who has nothing,

That’s what I call a charioteer;

stinginess with giving,

By these three means,

go to the state that does not pass,

focused only on extinguishment,

They blame you when you’re silent,

someone who is wholly praised

that sage of impeccable conduct,

Even the gods praise them,

Giving up bad bodily conduct,

Giving up bad verbal conduct,

Giving up bad mental conduct,

in thought, too, they are restrained:

not clinging to name and form.

others just hold the reins.

and lies with truth.

you may enter the presence of the gods.

where there is no sorrow.

their defilements come to an end.

they blame you when you speak a lot,

or wholly blamed.

endowed with ethics and wisdom;

and by the Divinity, too, they’re praised.

conduct yourself well in body.

conduct yourself well in speech.

conduct yourself well in mind.

they are restrained in every way.

and even when you speak just right:

no-one in the world escapes blame.
