---
slug: dhp273-289
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: 20. The Path
---

Of paths, the eightfold is the best;

<em>This</em> is the path, there is no other

When you all are practicing this,

You yourselves must do the work,

All conditions are impermanent—

All conditions are suffering—

All things are not-self—

They don’t get going when it’s time to start;

Guarded in speech, restrained in mind,

From meditation springs wisdom,

Cut down the jungle, not just a tree;

So long as the vine, no matter how small,

Cut out affection for oneself,

“Here I will stay for the rains;

As a mighty flood sweeps away a sleeping village,

Children provide you no shelter,

Knowing the reason for this,

of truths, the four statements;

for the purification of vision.

you’ll make an end of suffering.

the Realized Ones just show the way.

when this is seen with wisdom,

when this is seen with wisdom,

when this is seen with wisdom,

they’re young and strong, but given to sloth.

doing no unskillful bodily deed.

without meditation, wisdom ends.

from the jungle springs fear.

that ties a man to women is not cut,

like plucking an autumn lotus.

here for winter, here the summer”;

death steals away a man

nor does father, nor relatives.

astute, and ethically restrained,

dispassion is the best of things,

You all must practice this,

I have explained the path to you

Meditators practicing absorption

one grows disillusioned with suffering:

one grows disillusioned with suffering:

one grows disillusioned with suffering:

Their mind depressed in sunken thought,

Purify these three ways of performing deeds,

Knowing these two paths—

Having cut down jungle and snarl,

his mind remains trapped,

Foster only the path to peace,

thus the fool thinks,

who dotes on children and cattle,

When you’re seized by the terminator,

one would quickly clear the path

and the Clear-eyed One is the best of humans.

it is the way to baffle Māra.

for extracting the thorn with wisdom.

are released from Māra’s bonds.

this is the path to purity.

this is the path to purity.

this is the path to purity.

lazy and slothful, they can’t discern the path.

and win the path known to seers.

of progress and decline—

be free of jungles, mendicants!

like a calf suckling its mother.

the extinguishment the Holy One taught.

not realizing the danger.

his mind caught up in them.

there’s no shelter in family.

that leads to extinguishment.

you should conduct yourself

so that wisdom grows.
