---
slug: dhp21-32
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: 2. Diligence
---

Heedfulness is the state free of death;

Understanding this distinction

They who regularly meditate,

For the hard-working and mindful,

By hard work and diligence,

Fools and simpletons

Don’t devote yourself to negligence,

When the astute dispel negligence

Heedful among the heedless,

Maghavā became chief of the gods

A mendicant who loves diligence,

A mendicant who loves diligence,

heedlessness is the state of death.

when it comes to heedfulness,

always staunchly vigorous;

pure of deed and attentive,

by restraint and by self-control,

devote themselves to negligence.

or delight in erotic intimacy.

by means of diligence,

wide awake while others sleep—

by means of diligence.

seeing fear in negligence—

seeing fear in negligence—

The heedful do not die,

the astute rejoice in heedfulness,

the attentive realize extinguishment,

restrained, living righteously, and diligent,

a smart person would build an island

But the wise protect diligence

For if you’re diligent and meditate,

ascending the palace of wisdom,

a true sage leaves them behind,

People praise diligence,

advances like fire,

such a one can’t decline,

while the heedless are like the dead.

happy in the noble ones’ domain.

the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.

their reputation only grows.

that the floods cannot overflow.

as their best treasure.

you’ll attain abundant happiness.

sorrowless, they behold this generation of sorrow,

like a swift horse passing a feeble.

while negligence is always deplored.

burning up fetters big and small.

and has drawn near to extinguishment.

as an attentive one on a mountain top

beholds the fools below.
