---
slug: dhp235-255
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: 18. Stains
---

Today you’re like a withered leaf,

Make an island of yourself!

You’ve journeyed the stages of life,

Make an island of yourself!

A smart person would purge

It is the rust born on the iron

Not rehearsing is the stain of hymns.

Misconduct is a woman’s stain.

But a worse stain than these

Life is easy for the shameless.

Life is hard for the conscientious,

Take anyone in this world

and indulges in drinking

Know this, my man:

The people give according to their faith,

Those who have cut that out,

There is no fire like greed,

It’s easy to see the faults of others,

When you look for the flaws of others,

In the atmosphere there is no track,

In the atmosphere there is no track,

Yama’s men await you.

Swiftly strive, learn to be wise!

and now you set out to meet Yama.

Swiftly strive, learn to be wise!

their own stains gradually,

that eats away the place it arose.

The stain of houses is neglect.

A giver’s stain is stinginess.

is ignorance, the worst stain of all.

With all the rude courage of a crow,

always seeking purity,

who kills living creatures,

beer and wine.

they are unrestrained and wicked.

according to their confidence.

dug it up at the root, eradicated it,

no crime like hate,

hard to see one’s own.

always finding fault,

there’s no true ascetic outside here.

there’s no true ascetic outside here.

You stand at the departure gates,

Purged of stains, flawless,

Along the way there’s nowhere to stay,

Purged of stains, flawless,

bit by bit, moment by moment,

And so it is their own deeds

Laziness is the stain of beauty.

Bad qualities are a stain

Having given up that stain,

they live pushy,

neither clinging nor rude,

speaks falsely, steals,

Right here they dig up

Don’t let that greed and unrighteousness

If you get upset over that,

they will, by day or by night,

no net like delusion,

For the faults of others

your defilements only grow,

People enjoy proliferation,

No conditions last forever,

yet you have no supplies for the road.

you’ll go to the heavenly realm of the noble ones.

yet you have no supplies for the road.

you’ll not come again to rebirth and old age.

like a smith smelting silver.

that lead the overly-ascetic to a bad place.

A guard’s stain is negligence.

in this world and the next.

be without stains, mendicants!

rude, and corrupt.

pure of livelihood and discerning.

commits adultery,

the root of their own self.

inflict pain on you for long.

over others’ food and drink,

become immersed in samādhi.

no river like craving.

are tossed high like hay,

you’re far from ending defilements.

the Realized Ones are free of proliferation.

the Awakened Ones are not shaken.

you’ll not, by day or by night,

while one’s own are hidden,

become immersed in samādhi.

as a cheat hides a bad hand.
