---
slug: dhp256-272
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: 19. The Just
---

You don’t become just

A wise one judges others without haste,

You’re not an astute scholar

You’re not one who has memorized the teaching

You don’t become a senior

One who is truthful and principled,

Not by mere enunciation,

But if they’ve cut that out,

A liar and breaker of vows is no ascetic

One who stops all wicked deeds,

You don’t become a mendicant

But one living a spiritual life,

You don’t become a sage by being sagelike,

and shunning the bad—

You don’t become a noble one

Not by precepts and observances,

do I experience the bliss of renunciation

by passing hasty judgment.

justly and impartially;

just because you speak a lot.

just because you recite a lot.

by getting some grey hairs;

harmless, restrained, and self-controlled,

or a beautiful complexion

dug it up at the root, eradicated it,

just because they shave their head.

great and small,

just by begging from others.

who has banished both merit and evil,

while still confused and ignorant.

that is a sage, <j>and that is how one becomes a sage.

by harming living beings.

nor by much learning,

not frequented by ordinary people.

An astute person evaluates both

that guardian of the law

One who is secure, free of enmity and fear,

Someone who directly sees the teaching

for one ripe only in age,

attentive, purged of stains,

does a person become holy,

that wise one, purged of vice,

How on earth can one be an ascetic

because of stopping wicked deeds

One who has undertaken domestic duties

who wanders having appraised the world,

The astute one who holds the scales,

One who sagely weighs both in the world,

One harmless towards all living beings

nor by meditative immersion,

A mendicant cannot rest confident

what is pertinent and what is irrelevant.

is said to be just.

is said to be astute.

after hearing only a little

is said to have aged in vain.

is said to be a senior.

if they’re jealous, stingy, and devious.

is said to be holy.

who’s full of desire and greed?

is said to be an ascetic.

has not yet become a mendicant.

is said to be a mendicant.

taking only the best,

is thereby said to be a sage.

is said to be a noble one.

nor by living in seclusion,

without attaining the end of defilements.

is truly one who has memorized the teaching,

for they can never forget it.
