---
slug: dhp334-359
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: 24. Craving
---

When a man lives heedlessly,

Whoever is beaten by this wretched craving,

But whoever prevails over this wretched craving,

I say this to you, good people,

A tree grows back even when cut down,

A person of low views

The streams flow everywhere;

A personage’s joys

People governed by thirst,

People governed by thirst,

Unsnarled, they set out for the jungle,

The attentive say that shackle is not strong

this, say the attentive, is a strong shackle

Besotted by lust they fall into the stream,

Let go of the past, let go of the future,

For a personage churned by thoughts,

But one who loves to calm their thoughts,

One who is confident, unafraid,

Rid of craving, free of grasping,

I am the vanquisher of all, the knower of all,

The gift of the teaching surmounts all other gifts;

Riches ruin a simpleton,

Weeds are the bane of crops,

Weeds are the bane of crops,

Weeds are the bane of crops,

Weeds are the bane of crops,

craving grows in them like a camel’s foot creeper.

this attachment to the world,

so hard to get over in the world,

all those who have gathered here:

so long as its roots are strong and undamaged;

in whom the thirty-six streams

a weed springs up and remains.

flow from senses and cravings.

crawl about like a trapped rabbit.

crawl about like a trapped rabbit.

then they run right back to the jungle they left behind.

that’s made of iron, wood, or knots.

dragging the indulgent down, hard to escape.

like a spider caught in the web she wove.

let go of the present, having gone beyond rebirth.

very lustful, focusing on beauty,

developing perception of ugliness, ever mindful,

rid of craving, free of blemish,

expert in the definition of terms,

unsullied in the midst of all things.

the taste of the teaching surmounts all other tastes;

but not a seeker of the far shore.

but greed is these folk’s bane.

but hate is these folk’s bane.

but delusion is these folk’s bane.

but desire is these folk’s bane.

They jump from one thing to the next, like a langur

their sorrow grows,

their sorrows fall from them,

dig up the root of craving,

suffering springs up again and again,

that flow to pleasure are mighty,

Seeing this weed that has been born,

Seekers of happiness, bent on pleasure,

Bound and fettered, for a long time

That’s why one who longs for dispassion

Just look at this individual!

But obsession with jeweled earrings,

Having cut this one too they go forth,

The attentive proceed, having cut this one too,

With your heart freed in every respect,

their craving grows and grows,

will surely eliminate that craving,

having struck down the arrows flying to future lives,

knowing the correct

I’ve given up all, freed in the ending of craving.

the joy of the teaching surmounts all other joys;

From craving for wealth, a simpleton

That’s why a gift to one rid of greed

That’s why a gift to one rid of hate

That’s why a gift to one rid of delusion

That’s why a gift to one rid of desire

greedy for fruit in a forest grove.

like grass in the rain.

like a drop from a lotus-leaf.

as you’d dig up grass in search of roots.

so long as the tendency to craving is not pulled out.

is swept away by lustful thoughts.

cut the root with wisdom.

continue to be reborn and grow old.

they return to pain time and again.

should dispel thirst.

Freed, they run to bondage.

concern for your partners and children:

unconcerned, having given up sensual pleasures.

unconcerned, having given up all suffering.

you’ll not come again to rebirth and old age.

tying them with a stout bond.

cutting off the bonds of Māra.

this bag of bones is their last.

structure and sequence of syllables,

Since I know for myself, whose follower should I be?

the ending of craving surmounts all suffering.

ruins themselves and others.

is so very fruitful.

is so very fruitful.

is so very fruitful.

is so very fruitful.

Don’t let Māra break you again and again,

they are said to be one who bears their final body,

like a stream breaking a reed.

one of great wisdom, a great person.
