---
slug: dhp306-319
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: 22. Hell
---

A liar goes to hell,

Many who wear a scrap of ocher cloth

It’d be better for the immoral and unrestrained

Four things befall a heedless man

He accrues wickedness and is reborn in a bad place,

When kusa grass is wrongly grasped

Any lax act,

If one is to do what should be done,

A bad deed is better left undone,

As a frontier city

Unashamed of what is shameful,

Seeing danger where there is none,

Seeing fault where there is none,

Knowing a fault as a fault

as does one who denies what they did.

are unrestrained and wicked.

to eat an iron ball,

who sleeps with another’s wife:

all so a frightened couple <j>may snatch a moment’s pleasure,

it only cuts the hand.

any corrupt observance,

one should staunchly strive.

for it will plague you later on.

is guarded inside and out,

ashamed of what is not shameful;

and blind to the actual danger,

and blind to the actual fault,

and the faultless as faultless,

Both are equal in the hereafter,

Being wicked, they are reborn in hell

scorching, like a burning flame,

wickedness, poor sleep,

for which rulers impose a heavy punishment.

So too, the ascetic life, when wrongly taken,

or suspicious spiritual life,

For the life gone forth when laxly led

A good deed is better done,

so you should ward yourselves—

beings who uphold wrong view

beings who uphold wrong view

beings who uphold wrong view

beings who uphold right view

those men of base deeds.

due to their bad deeds.

than to eat the nation’s alms.

ill-repute, and rebirth in hell.

That’s why a man should not <j>sleep with another’s wife.

drags you to hell.

is not very fruitful.

just stirs up dust all the more.

one that does not plague you.

don’t let the moment pass you by.

go to a bad place.

go to a bad place.

go to a bad place.

go to a good place.

For if you miss your moment

you’ll grieve when sent to hell.
