---
slug: dhp320-333
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: 23. Elephants
---

Like an elephant struck

The well-tamed beast is the one led to the crowd;

Those who have tamed themselves are better

For not on those mounts

The tusker named Dhanapāla

One who gets drowsy from overeating,

In the past my mind wandered

Delight in diligence!

If you find an alert companion,

If you find no alert companion,

It’s better to wander alone,

A friend in need is a blessing;

In this world it’s a blessing to serve

It’s a blessing to keep precepts until you grow old;

with arrows in battle,

the tamed elephant’s the one the king mounts;

than fine tamed mules,

would you go to the untrodden place,

is musky in rut, hard to control.

fond of sleep, rolling round the bed

how it wished, where it liked, as it pleased.

Take good care of your mind!

an attentive friend to live happily together,

no attentive friend to live happily together,

there’s no fellowship with fools.

it’s a blessing to be content with whatever;

one’s mother and one’s father.

a blessing to be grounded in faith;

I shall endure abuse,

the tamed person who endures abuse

thoroughbreds from Sindh,

whereas, with the help of one <j>whose self is well tamed,

Bound, he eats not a morsel,

like a great hog stuffed with grain:

Now I’ll carefully guide it,

Pull yourself out of this pit,

then, overcoming all adversities,

then, like a king who flees his conquered realm,

Wander alone and do no wrong,

good deeds are a blessing at the end of life,

And it’s a blessing also to serve

the getting of wisdom’s a blessing;

for so many folk are badly behaved.

is the best of human beings.

or giant tuskers.

you go there, tamed by the tamed.

for he misses the elephant forest.

that dullard returns to the womb again and again.

as a trainer with a hook guides a rutting elephant.

like an elephant sunk in a bog.

wander with them, joyful and mindful.

wander alone like a tusker in the wilds.

at ease like a tusker in the wilds.

and giving up all suffering is a blessing.

ascetics and brahmins.

and it’s a blessing to avoid doing wrong.
