---
slug: dhp360-382
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: 25. Mendicants
---

Restraint of the eye is good;

Restraint of the body is good;

One restrained in hand and foot,

When a mendicant of restrained mouth,

Delighting in the teaching, enjoying the teaching,

A well-off mendicant ought not look down

If a mendicant is poor in offerings,

One who has no sense of ownership

A mendicant who meditates on love,

Bail out this boat, mendicant!

Five to cut, five to drop,

Practice absorption, don’t be negligent!

No absorption for one without wisdom,

A mendicant who enters an empty hut

Whenever they are mindful

This is the very start of the path

Mix with spiritual friends,

As a jasmine sheds

Calm in body, calm in speech,

Urge yourself on,

Self is indeed the lord of self,

A monk full of joy

A young mendicant

good is restraint of the ear;

good is restraint of speech;

and in speech, the supreme restraint;

thoughtful in counsel, not restless,

contemplating the teaching,

on others, nor should they be envious.

the well-to-do ought not look down on them.

in the whole realm of name and form,

devoted to the Buddha’s teaching,

When bailed out it will float lightly.

and five more to develop.

Don’t let the mind delight in the senses!

no wisdom for one without absorption.

with mind at peace

of the rise and fall of the aggregates,

for a wise mendicant here:

who are tireless and pure of livelihood.

its withered flowers,

peaceful and serene;

reflect on yourself.

for who else would be one’s lord?

trusting in the Buddha’s teaching,

devoted to the Buddha’s teaching,

restraint of the nose is good;

restraint of mind is good;

happy inside, serene,

explains the text and its meaning,

a mendicant who recollects the teaching

A mendicant who envies others

For the gods indeed praise them,

who does not grieve for that which is not,

would realize the peaceful state,

Having cut off desire and hate,

When a mendicant slips five chains

Don’t heedlessly swallow a hot iron ball!

But one with absorption and wisdom—

finds a superhuman delight

they feel rapture and joy:

guarding the senses, contentment,

Share what you have with others,

O mendicants,

a mendicant who’s spat out the world’s bait

A mendicant self-controlled and mindful

Self is indeed the home of self,

would realize the peaceful state,

lights up the world,

good is restraint of the tongue.

everywhere, restraint is good.

solitary, content, I call a mendicant.

their words are sweet.

doesn’t fall away from the true teaching.

does not achieve immersion.

who are tireless and pure of livelihood.

is said to be a mendicant.

the blissful stilling of conditions.

you shall reach extinguishment.

they’re said to have crossed the flood.

And when it burns, don’t cry, “Oh, the pain!”

they have truly drawn near to extinguishment.

as they rightly discern the Dhamma.

that is freedom from death for one who knows.

and restraint in the monastic code.

being skillful in your conduct.

shed greed and hate.

is said to be one at peace.

will always dwell in happiness.

so restrain yourself,

the blissful stilling of conditions.

like the moon freed from clouds.

The mendicant restrained everywhere

And when you’re full of joy,

as a merchant his thoroughbred steed.

is released from all suffering.

you’ll make an end to suffering.
