---
slug: dhp44-59
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: 4. Flowers
---

Who bestirs this earth,

A trainee bestirs this earth,

Knowing this body’s like foam,

As a mighty flood sweeps off a sleeping village,

The terminator gains control of the man

A bee takes the nectar

Don’t find fault with others,

Just like a glorious flower

Just like a glorious flower

Just as one would create many garlands

The fragrance of flowers doesn’t spread upwind,

Among all the fragrances—

Faint is the fragrance

For those accomplished in ethics,

From a heap of trash

So too, among those thought of as trash,

and the Yama realm with its gods?

and the Yama realm with its gods.

realizing it’s all just a mirage,

death steals away a man

who has not had his fill of pleasures,

and moves on, doing no damage

with what they’ve done or left undone.

that’s colorful but lacks fragrance;

that’s both colorful and fragrant,

from a heap of flowers,

nor sandalwood, pinwheel, or jasmine;

sandalwood or pinwheel

of sandal or pinwheel;

meditating diligently,

discarded on the highway,

a disciple of the perfect Buddha

Who sets out the well-taught word of truth,

A trainee sets out the well-taught word of truth,

and cutting off Māra’s blossoming,

even as he gathers flowers,

even as he gathers flowers,

to the flower’s beauty and fragrance;

You should only watch yourself,

eloquent speech is fruitless

eloquent speech is fruitful

when a person has come to be born,

but the fragrance of the good spreads upwind;

or lotus or jasmine—

but the fragrance of the virtuous

freed through the highest knowledge,

a lotus might blossom,

outshines with their wisdom

as an expert a flower?

as an expert a flower.

vanish from the King of Death.

his mind caught up in them.

his mind caught up in them.

and that’s how a sage should walk in the village.

what you’ve done or left undone.

for one who does not act on it.

for one who acts on it.

they should do many skillful things.

a true person’s virtue spreads in every direction.

the fragrance of virtue is supreme.

floats to the highest gods.

Māra cannot find their path.

fragrant and delightful.

the blind ordinary folk.
