---
slug: dhp60-75
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: 5. The Fool
---

Long is the night for the wakeful;

If while wandering you find no partner

“Sons are mine, wealth is mine”—

The fool who thinks they’re a fool

Though a fool attends to the wise

If a clever person attends to the wise

Fools and simpletons behave

It’s not good to do a deed

It is good to do a deed

The fool imagines that evil is sweet,

Month after month a fool may eat

For a wicked deed that has been done

Whatever fame a fool may get,

They’d seek the esteem that they lack,

“Let both layfolk and renunciants think

For the means to profit and the path to quenching

long is the league for the weary;

equal or better than yourself,

thus the fool frets.

is wise at least to that extent.

even for the rest of their life,

even just for an hour or so,

like their own worst enemies,

that plagues you later on,

that doesn’t plague you later on,

so long as it has not yet ripened.

food from a grass-blade’s tip;

does not curdle quickly like milk.

it only gives rise to harm.

and status among the mendicants;

the work was done by me alone.

are two quite different things.

long transmigrate the fools

then firmly resolve to wander alone—

For even your self is not your own,

But the true fool is said to be one

they still don’t understand the teaching,

they swiftly understand the teaching,

doing wicked deeds

for which you weep and wail,

that gladdens and cheers,

But as soon as that evil ripens,

but they’ll never be worth a sixteenth part

Smoldering, it follows the fool,

Whatever good features they have it ruins,

authority over monasteries,

In anything at all that’s to be done,

A mendicant disciple of the Buddha,

who don’t understand the true teaching.

there’s no fellowship with fools.

let alone your sons or wealth.

who imagines that they are wise.

like a spoon the taste of the soup.

like a tongue the taste of the soup.

that ripen as bitter fruit.

as its effect stays with you.

as its effect stays with you.

they fall into suffering.

of one who has appraised the teaching.

like a fire smothered over with ash.

and blows their head into bits.

and honor among other families.

let them fall under my sway alone.”

understanding what this really means,

So thinks the fool,

would never delight in honors,

their greed and pride only growing.

but rather would foster seclusion.
