---
slug: dhp76-89
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: 6. The Astute
---

Regard one who sees your faults

Advise and instruct;

Don’t mix with bad friends,

Through joy in the teaching you sleep at ease,

Irrigators guide water,

As the wind cannot stir

Like a deep lake,

True persons give up everything,

Never wish for success by unjust means,

Few are those among humans

When the teaching is well explained,

Rid of dark qualities,

try to find satisfaction there,

Those whose minds are rightly developed

as a guide to a hidden treasure.

curb wickedness:

nor with the worst of men.

with clear and confident heart.

fletchers straighten arrows,

a solid mass of rock,

clear and unclouded,

they don’t cajole for the things they desire.

for your own sake or that of another,

who cross to the far shore.

those who practice accordingly

an astute person should develop the bright.

having left behind sensual pleasures.

in the awakening factors;

Stay close to one so wise and astute

for you shall be loved by the good,

Mix with spiritual friends,

An astute person always delights in the teaching

carpenters carve timber,

so too blame and praise

so clear are the astute

Though touched by sadness or happiness,

desiring children, wealth, or nation;

The rest just run around

will cross over

Leaving home behind

Owning nothing, an astute person

who, letting go of attachments,

who corrects you when you need it.

and disliked by the bad.

and with the best of men.

proclaimed by the Noble One.

the astute tame themselves.

do not affect the wise.

when they hear the teachings.

the astute appear neither depressed nor elated.

rather, be virtuous, wise, and just.

on the near shore.

Death’s dominion so hard to pass.

for the seclusion so hard to enjoy,

would cleanse themselves of mental corruptions.

delight in not grasping:

Sticking close to such an impartial person,

with defilements ended, brilliant,

things get better, not worse.

they are quenched in this world.
