---
slug: dhp90-99
source: suttacentral/bilara-data
translator: sujato
license: CC0
title: 7. The Perfected Ones
---

At journey’s end, rid of sorrow;

The mindful apply themselves;

Those with nothing stored up,

One whose defilements have ended;

Whose faculties have become serene,

Undisturbed like the earth,

Their mind is peaceful,

Lacking faith, a house-breaker,

Whether in village or wilderness,

Delightful are the wildernesses

everywhere free,

they delight in no abode.

who have understood their food,

who’s not attached to food;

like horses tamed by a charioteer,

true to their vows, steady as Indra’s pillar,

peaceful are their speech and deeds.

one who acknowledges nothing,

in a valley or the uplands,

where no people delight.

all ties given up,

Like a swan gone from the marsh,

whose domain is the liberation

whose domain is the liberation

who has abandoned conceit and defilements;

like a lake clear of mud;

Such a one is at peace,

purged of hope, they’ve wasted their chance:

wherever the perfected ones live

Those free of greed will delight there,

no fever is found in them.

they leave home after home behind.

of the signless and the empty:

of the signless and the empty:

the unaffected one is envied by even the gods.

such a one does not transmigrate.

rightly freed through enlightenment.

that is indeed the supreme person!

is a delightful place.

not those who seek sensual pleasures.

their path is hard to trace,

their track is hard to trace,

like birds in the sky.

like birds in the sky.
